ADAPTABLE
DEFINITION:showing flexibility and versatility regardless of the situation

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:flexible, resilient, versatile

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong inner drive
Growing up in a dangerous or unpredictable environment
Being a caregiver to someone who has a chronic illness
Thriving on challenges
Moving from place to place frequently in childhood
Having a calm, unflappable nature
Carrying little or no emotional baggage
Having a positive attitude
Having strong self-esteem

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Thinking quickly
Holding down more than one job
Being comfortable with responsibility
Enjoying travel and exposure to new cultures
Being highly organized
Being a team player
Sociability with others
Confidence
Being competitive with oneself
Open-mindedness
Exhibiting strong decision-making skills
Persuasiveness, either through good people skills or manipulation
Planning ahead; keeping alternatives in mind
Being prepared for anything
Not shying away from challenges
Being knowledgeable in many areas
Pursuing education or training to make oneself more prepared
Following orders efficiently
Preferring a variety of experiences over routine
Spontaneity and agreeability
Being willing to improvise
Recovering from disappointments or setbacks quickly
Having strong multitasking skills
Vocally expressing one’s ideas
Being a good listener
Having a strong sense of empathy
Being thoughtful and considerate
Having broad interests and hobbies
Maintaining firm control of one’s emotions
Taking advantage of opportunities
Learning from one’s past mistakes

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’d like to go out but if Margaret wants to eat in, we can do that, too.
I’ll take over Rick’s report. The team is waiting on it and he could be out sick for days.
Since no one else is stepping up, I will.
I’m glad Marcy’s planning our vacation. Wherever we end up going will be great.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, curiosity, eagerness, happiness, peacefulness, pride

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Adaptable characters are reliable and responsible and can thrive in almost any situation. They enjoy challenges and new experiences and are at ease with change. Even during stressful situations, they can keep volatile emotions at bay. Adaptable characters are able to work with others or lead, whichever is needed to achieve the goal. They are quick thinkers who are able to keep their heads when others lose theirs.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with this attribute can grow restless if they feel they are not stimulated enough. They don’t always place as much importance on family and friendships as other people do; relationships may suffer if these characters are paired with people who require stability and routine.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Jason Bourne fromThe Bourne Identityis a trained operative who has lost his memory. Seen as a threat by his government, he is hunted by other assassins and must remain versatile in order to survive. Resourceful and persistent, he fights when necessary, obtains money and documentation, and adapts to each new environment so he can react as needed and remain safe.Other Examples from Film:Simon Templar (The Saint), Hawkeye (The Last of the Mohicans)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:compulsive, decisive, impatient, introverted, judgmental, meticulous, pensive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ADAPTABLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Ambiguity (a situation, set of instructions, etc.) that one cannot prepare for
PLOTLINE: Being asked to do something that will likely result in injury, suffering, or worse
PLOTLINE: Experiencing conflicts between one’s moral beliefs and the need to carry out an order
PLOTLINE: Being required to always respond to situations the same way, with no variation
