ADVENTUROUS
DEFINITION:willing to try new experiences and take risks

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:daring, risk-taking, venturous

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up with parents who had a strong sense of adventure
Being encouraged as a child to try new things and experiences
Having adrenaline-junkie tendencies
Requiring constant stimulation; being easily bored
Being an extrovert

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Participating in extreme sports (rock climbing, sky diving, bungee jumping, etc.)
Obtaining injuries as a result of activities (broken bones, etc.)
Taking risks for fun
Initiating conversation in social situations
Researching new thrills, adventures, and experiences to attempt
Trying new foods
Having a positive attitude
Having a large social circle
Being gear-savvy; using proper equipment for an activity
Reading up on other countries and activities to experience there
Joining adventure-centric clubs or groups
Working to live, not living to work
Enjoying meeting new people
Not being tied to a single place
Asking people where they’ve travelled and what they’ve done
Preferring to spend money on experiences rather than material things
Consistently filling one’s free time
Being interested in other cultures and alternative lifestyles
Having a strong sense of self-esteem
Confidence
Open-mindedness
Friendliness
Enjoying the rush of adrenaline
Being “high energy”
Exuberance
Being healthy and fit
Having more than the usual knowledge of nutritional needs and how the body works
Being multilingual
Desiring to share one’s experiences with others; introducing them to new things
Training to become proficient in activities (scuba lessons, cliff diving, etc.)
Difficulty saving money due to the high costs of gear, travel, and activities

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
A few more weekend climbs like this and I can take on Devil’s Peak!
Renee said the diving in Australia can’t be beat; that’s where I’m going next.
Donnie is worrying too much. This skydiving company has an excellent reputation.
A polar bear swim! That’s what I need to do.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, excitement, happiness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Adventurous characters attract other people who share their energy and sense of fun. Willing to experiment and try new things, these characters want to experience all that life has to offer. While others might settle for what makes them content, those with an adventurous spirit will strive for complete happiness and satisfaction regardless of the risk or cost.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters commonly indulge in activities that create an emotional high. They don’t often consider the consequences, which can put them in danger and bring about physical harm. Their need for adventure may cloud their judgment, encouraging them to push boundaries. When in a group of other adventurous types, peer pressure to do more and go farther can lead to poor choices.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Indiana Jones, the daring archaeologist from the movie franchise, is a die-hard adventurer who will go to any lengths to solve the mysteries of the ancient world. Indy easily adapts to different—often dangerous—cultures and environments and thrives on the pursuit of knowledge, risking much to obtain relics that will provide new information about the past.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Peter Pan (Peter Pan), Lara Croft (Tomb Raider), the Dauntless faction (Divergentseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:calm, cynical, insecure, meticulous, needy, nervous, paranoid

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ADVENTUROUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Suffering an injury or illness that prevents one from getting out and doing things
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s job; not having the financial means to pursue adventure opportunities
PLOTLINE: Being with a group whose risk-taking level is significantly higher or lower than one’s own
PLOTLINE: Having an accident that causes a phobia that prevents the enjoyment of a favorite activity
