AFFECTIONATE
DEFINITION:showing open fondness for others

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:doting, loving, tender

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a loving home
Overcompensating for a lack of love in the past
Having affectionate role models
Neediness; a fear of being alone or abandoned
Having a romantic nature
Being highly empathetic
Having a desire to nurture

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Hugging, kissing and nuzzling
Holding hands
Wanting to hold and be held
Holding onto someone’s arm to keep the person close
Stroking an arm or shoulder for physical reassurance
Giving compliments and praising others
Doing favors for others (small acts of kindness, etc.)
Writing poetry for a loved one
Offering small gifts or tokens
Being able to read the body language of others
Freely expressing one’s feelings
Giving massages and foot rubs
Telling loved ones how special they are
Being supportive of loved ones in all their endeavors
Sitting and touching (legs touching, a hand on the other’s leg, etc.)
Putting an arm around someone’s shoulder
Saying words of encouragement
Sensory sensitivity, especially to touch
Agreeing to do things that will please one’s significant other
Adopting another’s hobbies or interests as a way of increasing intimacy
Calling a loved one frequently during the day
Pursuing sexual intimacy
SayingI love you
Building strong relationships
Compassion
Empathy
Using pet names; talking in a playful voice
Trustworthiness
Being emotionally vulnerable and open
Kindness and friendliness
Being motivated by goodwill and love
Intuitively assessing the needs and moods of others
Being open about one’s emotions
Being observant; paying attention to what loved ones need
Speaking affectionately of loved ones to others

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Dave seems tense. A back rub will help him relax.
I don’t care what my mother thinks. I love Amy, and I’m going to show it.
Allen is so good to me. I think I’ll surprise him with a romantic dinner.
It’s so sweet when my kids hold hands!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, desire, elation, gratitude, love, peacefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Affectionate characters show their emotions in obvious ways. They’re attuned to their feelings and aren’t ashamed to tell others how they feel. Through their lack of inhibition, these characters build healthy and nurturing relationships that make others feel safe and loved.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters may not always properly judge when and where to indulge in public displays of affection. From a mom hugging her teenage son in front of his peers to a make-out session between co-workers at the office Christmas party, affectionate displays are not always appropriate and can cause embarrassment for others.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:InAnne of Green Gables, Diana Barry is the girl next door who is full of romantic ideas of friendship and love. Devoted to Anne, Diana sees her as an adventurous sister and the two become inseparable. Always hugging or holding hands to show their closeness, they stage a ceremony to declare their future as “bosom” friends. Diana becomes an important person in Anne’s life by showing her the warmth and love that Anne had always longed for.Other Examples from Film, TV, and Literature:Evelyn and Rick O’Connell (The Mummy Returns), Abby Sciuto (NCIS), Novice Aes Sedai (The Wheel of Time)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cruel, dishonest, gullible, hostile, inhibited, proper, timid, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE AFFECTIONATE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being absent from loved ones for long periods (being a soldier or having to travel for work, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being in a relationship that is forbidden or taboo by societal or religious standards
PLOTLINE: Experiencing upsets in a marriage or committed relationship
PLOTLINE: Hiding a relationship from others
PLOTLINE: Being forced into a marriage where one doesn’t feel affection for one’s partner
PLOTLINE: Being drawn to someone who is uncomfortable with physical touch
