ALERT
DEFINITION:being aware of and watchful for possible change or danger

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:aware, vigilant, watchful

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up during a period of war or turmoil
Being exposed to danger or prejudice
Having parents who taught one to be wary of danger
Being hurt or abused in the past
Living in a society categorized by uncertainty, corruption, or mistrust

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Anticipating possible dangers before they occur
Planning ahead
Evaluating one’s options
Always having an exit strategy
Asking questions
Paying close attention to what is said
Being highly observant
Having heightened senses; noticing things that others miss
Thinking about theWhat if?scenario
Avoiding risk and situations where one might be in danger
Being prepared for alternatives
Valuing one’s privacy
Heeding the rules and warnings; reading the fine print
Being cautious when it comes to online safety
Locking doors
Adhering to proven, stable routines and choices
Paying attention to one’s intuition
Prioritizing one’s health; getting enough sleep
Controlling one’s emotions
Avoiding volatile situations or people
Preferring to know what’s coming rather than being surprised
Keeping an eye on one’s wallet, purse, or other items of importance
Trying things out before purchasing (test-driving a car, etc.)
Being hard on oneself when mistakes are made
Noticing small changes
Exhibiting strong listening skills
Researching a vacation spot carefully before committing to visit
Having emergency kits in one’s home and car
Taking extra safety measures (installing a security system, turning on lights, etc.)
Making eye contact with others
Having a difficult time opening up or showing one’s vulnerability
Neighborhood attentiveness (recognizing the cars parked on one’s street, etc.)
Reading the newspaper or watching the news to stay up to date
Giving full attention to one’s surroundings (not texting while driving, etc.)
Being aggressive when a threat is perceived
Taking responsibility for others (watching a neighbor’s child to be sure she gets on the bus safely)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
The kids left their toys out again. I’ll pick them up before someone trips in the dark.
I don’t remember leaving the front door unlocked.
This is a good parking spot—right under the flood light.
Everyone else might like Carrie, but there’s something not quite right about her.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, determination, fear, suspicion, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Alert characters are always aware of their surroundings and anticipate danger before it happens. They can be valuable in keeping others safe due to their vigilance. These characters are highly observant, noticing little things that others miss. They trust their instincts and are more concerned with safety and avoiding danger than with what others may think of their hyper awareness.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While alert characters are great at sniffing out trouble, they can go overboard and anticipate danger where there is none. Their worries about possible problems can limit their ability to have fun and relax; these tendencies can also feel suffocating to others. An alert character who has experienced much danger can drift into paranoia, viewing all people and uncertain situations as dangerous.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Dr. Richard Kimble (The Fugitive) is on the run both from the Chicago P.D. and the Treasury Department, determined to prove his innocence in the murder of his wife. While searching for the clues that will reveal who killed her and why, Kimble must constantly be on the alert for signs that the authorities are closing in.Other Examples from Film and Literature:John Rambo (First Blood), Frank Horrigan (In the Line of Fire), Jason Bourne (theBourneseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:adventurous, impulsive, playful, spunky, uninhibited

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ALERT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Feeling intense emotions that encourage rashness (rage, love, desire, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being paired with an impulsive character who is always leaping without looking
PLOTLINE: Living in a constantly changing environment
PLOTLINE: A situation where one or more of the senses are diminished or no longer reliable
PLOTLINE: A tragedy where one misses the danger signs and blames oneself for the fallout
