AMBITIOUS
DEFINITION:driven by the desire to achieve a particular goal

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:driven

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Confidence and pride
Being a passionate person; having big dreams
The desire to achieve something one lacked as a child
A fear of failure
Needing to prove oneself to others or desiring to leave behind a legacy
Having ambitious parents
Sibling or peer rivalry
Insecurity; worrying about not meeting expectations or not being good enough
Wanting to please others
Craving prestige or wealth that only success can bring
Having a noble purpose (to stop poverty, to oust a neighborhood’s gangs, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Rising early
Being energetic
Determination
Efficiency
Seeking out education or training; honing the skills needed for achievement
Choosing to spend time with people who can help one become successful
Working overtime or during holidays to get ahead
Using flattery or being overly polite when dealing with those in power
Asking for help from people in a position to do so
Calling in favors
Embracing hard work
Planning for the future
Taking on greater responsibilities
Ignoring friendships in favor of working toward a goal
Being highly organized
Prioritizing one’s needs
Having strong willpower
Keeping a token for inspiration (a toy Ferrari to symbolize the real thing, etc.)
Tackling tasks that others avoid or feel are beyond them
Learning quickly from one’s mistakes instead of dwelling on them
Breaking down big goals into smaller milestones to mark one’s progress
Researching what one will need; making a plan for success
Using others who achieved ambitious goals as role models
Making choices that lead to fulfilling one’s goals
Not being satisfied with the status quo
Believing that things can always be better
Wanting to do better or become the best at something
Taking risks
Being competitive with others
Not allowing fears or worries to limit oneself
Thinking “big”
Not being overly fazed by setbacks; refocusing and moving past them

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
If I go to work early, my boss will see how dedicated I am to the company.
This year, I’m going to cross “run a marathon” off my bucket list.
So I don’t go out as much as Lee. That’s why I’m a director and he’s still a manager.
Amy’s the one for me; now I just have to get her to see it, too.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, confidence, determination, hopefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Ambitious characters are hardworking visionaries who don’t give up easily. When others see only roadblocks, these characters see amazing futures. Ambition requires great focus and single-mindedness that enables most people with this trait to succeed at their goals.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with ambition run the risk of putting their goals above everything else, including the people or priorities in life that should come first. When ethics and success become incompatible, achieving the goal often wins out. Many are perfectionists with unrealistic expectations who view anything short of success as failure. These characters also may set goals so high that they become unreachable, which leads to unhappiness and a lack of fulfillment.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Former salesman Chris Gardner (The Pursuit of Happyness) is unemployed and homeless with his young son when he’s offered the chance to pursue a career as a stockbroker. The sole intern position is highly sought after, and Chris must fight for it despite having little money, no home, and no experience. Despite these seemingly insurmountable obstacles, Chris does everything within his power to make a better life for him and his son.Other Examples from Film:Melanie Carmichael (Sweet Home Alabama), Bud Fox (Wall Street)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:obedient, lazy, pensive, pushy, scatterbrained

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE AMBITIOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Pursuing a goal that breaks tradition or law (a female determined to be a Catholic priest, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being required to go against one’s ethics (being part of a cover-up, etc.) to succeed
PLOTLINE: Having a competitor who is both talented and worthy
PLOTLINE: Having a physical or mental handicap
PLOTLINE: Having rivals without scruples who are willing to do whatever it takes to win
PLOTLINE: Having a responsibility that takes up a lot of one’s time (caring for a sick uncle, etc.)
