ANALYTICAL
DEFINITION:skilled in thinking and reasoning; having a natural instinct to study and analyze

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:logical, rational

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Intelligence
Being highly curious
Being driven by the desire for order
A fear of making mistakes
Having an interest in why things work
Having parents who encouraged one to understand cause and effect
Being emotionally disconnected
Perfectionism

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Asking questions
Reading up on a topic to attain better understanding
Studying things that evoke curiosity
Running experiments
Being well-read
Posing theories and attempting to prove them
Getting hung up on the little things
Having an interest in human behavior and psychology
Being unable to let go unless every possibility has been explored
Reading into what people say and do
Looking for patterns and cause-effect relationships
Needing to categorize and find order in one’s life
Exploring how one decision creates a chain reaction
Being uncomfortable with sarcasm and jokes
Obsessing over minute details
Not being able to let something go
Needing to understand the “why” behind a process, action, or behavior
Showing less emotion than most people
Placing value on facts instead of feelings
Being organized and logical
Adhering to routines and schedules
PosingWhat if?questions
Enjoying the chance to explain how something works
Being honest even when it hurts:Yes, you do look overweight in that dress.
Being skeptical when presented with new ideas, beliefs, or “truths” without proof
Struggling in social situations (making small talk, etc.)
Being highly observant
Correcting misinformation or misconceptions
Sucking the enjoyment out of something by rationalizing it to others
Being good with numbers
Keeping a journal of one’s thoughts and observations
Being able to quickly and accurately assess a situation

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Why ask me how she looked if she didn’t want the truth?
Liam is so afraid of the dark. Maybe something probably happened to him as a child.
I don’t understand love rituals. Why not just say what you feel?
Everyone has an opinion, but no one bothers to find out the facts.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:conflicted, determination, skepticism

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Analytical characters are thinkers, and can often see much deeper into a problem or situation than others. They enjoy the process of metaphorically reducing an object or issue to its base components in order to see what’s working and what needs improvement. These characters work well alone, are dedicated and intelligent, and are strong problem solvers.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with this attribute tend to get caught up in the details and miss the big picture. Their minds are always working, which can make it difficult for them to relax and enjoy social situations. Their constant desire to analyze everyone and everything can make people uncomfortable. For these reasons, analytical characters may have a hard time connecting with others on a meaningful level.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Sheldon Cooper from TV’sBig Bang Theorylooks at everything in an analytical manner, basing almost every decision on a mathematical probability. Superiorly intelligent yet socially challenged, he lives his life according to a strict routine and has difficulty with the emotional component of friendship. A theoretical physicist, Sheldon will not support theories without in-depth empirical evidence. His actions are based on logic and fact rather than feeling.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Sherlock Holmes, Mike McDermott (Rounders), Lincoln Rhyme (Lincoln Rhymeseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:adaptable, adventurous, illogical, impulsive, melodramatic, paranoid, sentimental

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ANALYTICAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being drawn to a hobby or activity that is illogical but brings enjoyment
PLOTLINE: Drinking alcohol
PLOTLINE: Attending frivolous events (cocktail parties with small talk, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Spending extensive amounts of time with small children
PLOTLINE: Having a fear or phobia that can’t be analyzed or explained
