APPRECIATIVE
DEFINITION:showing thankful recognition for what life brings

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:grateful, thankful

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Experiencing a life-shaping event that puts things into perspective
Being taught as a child to be grateful for what one has
Having a strong faith in God or another deity
Surviving death
Having escaped a dangerous environment or situation
Being strongly aware of one’s freedom
Happiness and satisfaction
Possessing a strong spirit; feeling whole and content

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Adaptability
Loyalty
Seeking out the world’s beauty (traveling, experiencing natural wonders, etc.)
Encouraging others to let go of worries and negative emotions
Smiling
Being thankful for what one has
Not being materialistic in nature
Having a strong work ethic
Caring for others
Seeking ways to “pay it forward”
Positivity
Friendliness
Treating others with care and thoughtfulness
Finding happiness in simplicity
Being willing to help others however one can
Believing that everything will work out for the best
Not sweating the small stuff
Being non-judgmental
Having a strong connection to nature
Frequent humming or singing
Believing that every living thing has a purpose
Inquisitiveness (asking questions, showing interest in others and the world, etc.)
Praying
Having a strong sense of community
Being committed to others
Speaking with sincerity
Proactively helping or caring for others without needing to be asked
Valuing every moment and experience
Not shying away from emotional expression
Being at peace with one’s circumstances
Excelling in teamwork situations
Being willing to share what one has; generosity
Seeing mistakes as opportunities to learn and grow
Sharing one’s life lessons with others
Praising others for their kindness or thoughtfulness; sayingThank you

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I have the best family in the world. I can’t imagine raising my kids without them.
Nothing is more soothing than the sound of the surf. I love living by the ocean.
Dara is a kind neighbor, bringing us cookies whenever she goes on a baking spree.
I love my critique group! What a blessing to learn from such talented writers.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:eagerness, elation, gratitude, happiness, hopefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Appreciative characters show gratitude for whatever comes their way. Because of their positive attitudes and adaptability, they find silver linings in hard times, see lessons in the midst of mistakes, and focus on small pleasures to remove the sting from difficult moments. These characters are centered and at ease with themselves. They make loyal friends and are good influencers, encouraging their companions to search out and find the peace that accompanies gratitude and contentment.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters who are highly appreciative can sometimes become passive, just accepting what comes their way without setting their own goals or challenging the status quo. Loved ones and co-workers can become frustrated with their complacency or label them as naïve for being so accepting. The loyalty of appreciate characters can render them vulnerable when they trust “friends” to have their best interests at heart when they do not.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:When he is saved from being eaten by his fellow cannibals, the native Friday (Robinson Crusoe), expresses his undying thanks by pledging himself eternally to his savior. Throughout his life, Friday remains true to Crusoe, never wavering from the promise that he made out of gratitude.Other Examples from Film and TV:the Vang Lor family (Gran Torino), Leonard Hofstadter (The Big Bang Theory)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cocky, controlling, disrespectful, jaded, manipulative, superficial, ungrateful

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE APPRECIATIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being in the debt of someone one doesn’t like
PLOTLINE: Living in volatile times, such as a war, revolution, or an uprising
PLOTLINE: Feeling loyalties to opposing causes or people
PLOTLINE: Seeing others suffer and being unable to alleviate that suffering
PLOTLINE: Having a crisis of faith in God or country
