BOLD
DEFINITION:having an intrepid spirit

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:assertive, audacious, gutsy, nervy

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
The desire to prove oneself
High self-confidence
The tendency to be consumed by one’s goals
Fearlessness
Being driven by a strong sense of righteousness
The belief in a higher power or purpose
Desiring to know the truth at all costs

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Assertiveness
Coming up with unconventional solutions
Speaking one’s mind even when one’s opinion isn’t popular
Enthusiasm; being energetic
Positivity
Taking risks
Being highly extroverted
Acting in a way that inspires others; leading by example
Making decisions without hesitation
Being the first to speak with or greet others
Having open body posture
Trying new things; seeking out new experiences
Taking the initiative (planning events, making suggestions, flirting, etc.)
Dressing and behaving confidently
Entertaining ideas that most others would dismiss (a radical career change or move, etc.)
Asking for what one wants or needs
Openness and transparency
Not beating around the bush
Pushing limits and boundaries
Having a strong gut instinct
Being one’s own advocate
Taking responsibility without hesitation
Challenging rules or conditions that don’t make sense
Not being held back by fear
Having strong convictions
Not caring what others think
Embracing innovation
Being goal oriented
Looking within to determine what one really wants, then pursuing it
Not being fazed by rejection or failure; bouncing back quickly
Friendliness
Encouraging others to go after their dreams
Handling stress and adversity head-on
Decisiveness
Refusing to be a people-pleaser

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’ve been with this bank so long; I bet they’ll waive this fee if I ask.
I don’t understand Cara. If she thinks she deserves a raise, why not ask for it?
This cross-country bike tour is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. I can’t wait!
I am so sick of these snotty boating club events. Dad will be pissed, but I’m done with them.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, desire, determination, eagerness, hopefulness, pride

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Bold characters are go-getters; they know what they want and aren’t afraid to go after it. When it comes to pursuing their goals, they are able to take the ups with the downs and maintain forward momentum. People are often drawn to their confidence and willingness to stand up for what they believe in. The fearlessness of these characters makes them good leaders and strong protagonists.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Boldness can seem overwhelming to certain kinds of people. Shy or insecure characters may find such fearless determination intimidating and even be turned off by it. Bold characters commit quickly, making things difficult for partners, co-workers, or potential love interests who want to take things slowly. Because of their convictions, these characters have a hard time backing away from what they believe to be the most direct course, and can come across as being uncooperative, self-serving, or pushy to others.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Despite his unconventional history as a white man brought up by Native Americans, Hawkeye (The Last of the Mohicans) exhibits a boldness that often results in achieving his desired results. In the face of open hostility, he remains loyal to his Mohican family. When he sets his sights on Cora, he pursues her regardless of the many obstacles in his way. In every situation, he speaks his mind with confidence, regardless of the opposition.Other Examples from Film:Maximus Decimus Meridius (Gladiator), Frank Slade (Scent of a Woman)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:calm, cautious, cowardly, irresponsible, patient, timid, whimsical, worrywart

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE BOLD CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having a rival with the same desire or goal who is equally bold and determined to achieve it
PLOTLINE: Wanting something that one cannot have (a relationship with a happily married woman, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Finding oneself in a situation where boldness is the wrong tactic (dealing with an abuse victim, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Wanting something that will do one harm (revenge, etc.)
