CALM
DEFINITION:inclined toward tranquility and serenity

CATEGORIES:interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:composed, peaceful, placid, sedate, serene, tranquil, unruffled

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Feeling at peace with oneself and the world
Having a strong feeling of belonging
Believing in a higher power or purpose
Intuitiveness
Being naturally easygoing in nature
Having a boring personality
Having little or no imagination
Practicality
Growing up in an environment or culture where emotional temperance was valued
Having a desire for peace

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Thinking before reacting
Speaking in a soft voice and tone
Using soothing touches and gestures that comfort others
Having excellent reasoning skills
Enjoying simple pleasures
Accurately reading people and their emotions
Not allowing circumstances to stress one out
Having strong control over one’s emotions
Positivity
Resiliency
Being a good mediator or peacemaker
Making choices that are safe and predictable
Being a good judge at what people need
Being empathetic; putting oneself in other people’s shoes
Comforting others through sympathy and understanding
Openness
Being risk-averse
Coping easily with stress or change
Having a relaxed manner
Not being brought down by the negativity of others
Patience and tolerance
Taking the high road:Oh, don’t worry, I wasn’t offended.
Enjoying solitary activities
Quickly letting go of the negatives
Defusing a situation by apologizing, whether one is to blame or not
Taking one’s time
Dealing with a volatile situation by not tackling it head-on
Smiling; seeing the bright side
Predictability
Making time for activities that reinforce calm (reading, reflecting, meditating, etc.)
Not being afraid to sayNo
Not overcommitting oneself
Prioritizing well
Sleeping well

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Looks like rain. I’ll cancel our hike and have the girls over for tea instead.
I love this song. It always makes me smile.
Jim’s had such a hard time since Sue’s death. I’ll try not to take what he said personally.
It’s too bad I didn’t win. But the after party will still be fun.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, gratitude, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Calm characters don’t rock the boat. They’re dependable, do what they say they’ll do, and can be relied on to respond predictably in any situation. As such, they act as stabilizers for others who might have a tendency for high drama or reactiveness. Because they don’t allow emotion to sway them, calm characters can be depended on to make solid decisions. Their composed, peaceful nature can be the glue that keeps a group from falling apart.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because of their consistency and reliability, calm characters may also be boring. If they are too complacent and risk-averse they may miss opportunities to excel and achieve a greater level of self-growth. Their tendency to always do the right thing can render them unrealistic and forgettable.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Spock (Star Trek) is an officer aboard the starship Enterprise and is known for his even demeanor and sense of calm. His Vulcan heritage enables him to put aside the emotional component of difficult situations and think logically. Regardless of danger or strife, Spock is the rock of the leadership team, anchoring others during stressful times and encouraging rationale over sentiment.Other Examples from Film:Mr. Miyagi (Karate Kid), Tony Mendez (Argo), Anton Chiguhr (No Country for Old Men)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:adventurous, catty, impulsive, nagging, reckless, rowdy, spunky, temperamental

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE CALM CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Falling in love with an adventurous person
PLOTLINE: Being paired with characters who are melodramatic or confrontational
PLOTLINE: Facing a life or death situation
PLOTLINE: Dealing with phobias or fears
PLOTLINE: Living in a high-stress environment where being calm or complacent could get one killed
