CAUTIOUS
DEFINITION:given to prudent forethought before acting

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:careful, heedful

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Living in a dangerous environment
Witnessing loved ones who suffered calamities as a result of risky behavior
Being hurt in the past
Being the victim of abuse or crime
Living with fears, phobias, or social anxiety
Fragile health
Having overly protective parents
Believing in superstition and bad luck

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Asking questions
Investigating and researching before making decisions
Avoiding risky situations or places
Entering relationships slowly
Going over the details
Being slow to trust
Having a closed body posture
Sharing one’s thoughts and opinions in a round-about way, rather than directly
Having a backup plan
Pickiness
Repeating instructions several times to ensure they will be followed
Taking the time to study new places
Doing one’s research beforehand
Valuing privacy
Being confident in one’s decisions, knowing that ample thought was put into them
Being pessimistic or, at best, cautiously optimistic
Showing respect for boundaries and rules
Wariness; being watchful for danger
Locking doors; not sleeping with windows open
Committing with reluctance
Learning from the past and applying those lessons
Frequently changing passwords to protect oneself online
Placing cherished objects in a safe place
Hiding things from view to remove temptation (not leaving a tablet on the car seat, etc.)
Comparing different choices and scenarios
Giving trust to those who earn it
Speaking slowly; choosing one’s words with purpose
Offering to clarify something one has said to ensure understanding
Needing time to reflect on one’s options
Requesting a delay if one needs time to think things through
Being active and involved in one’s finances and investments
Double-checking everything
Not liking surprises
Evaluating a past experience to determine if one would do the same thing again
Difficulty letting others make the decisions

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
She didn’t sound confident with those directions. I’ll check my GPS, to make sure.
Oops. Sarah left her purse sitting in plain view. I’ll hold onto it until she gets back.
I can’t believe they asked for my credit card number over the phone. Do they think I’m stupid?
I’ll go out with him if he agrees to meet at the restaurant instead of picking me up at home.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anxiety, confidence, suspicion, wariness, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Cautious people are observant, connected to their environment, and aware of shifting dynamics. When emotions run high, these characters can restore balance and apply reasoning techniques that enable others to make decisions with a clear head. They look before they leap, think before they act, and generally are the ones still alive at the end of a horror movie.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Cautious characters can sometimes be seen as mood-killers when others want to be spontaneous. Worried about possible risks, these characters rely on data and fact; they need to know the variables and potential outcomes before acting. They also see it as their duty to point out risks to teammates, which isn’t always taken well by others. Cautious characters may have a hard time relaxing in an environment outside their comfort zone and may be averse to trying new things. If too many factors are unknown, they are often unable to commit.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Ellen Ripley (Alien) embodies caution. When her shipmates try to bring aboard an alien life form, she takes her time, gathering information before eventually deciding to deny them access. Her decision is overridden and she finds herself trapped aboard the ship with an acid-bleeding alien. In the aftermath, it’s her cautious nature that allows her to survive while her crewmates perish. Brave, intelligent, and intuitive, Ripley is able to control her fear and take care each step of the way, considering the dangers and risks before taking action.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Columbus (Zombieland), Jean Valjean (Les Misérables), Aragorn(The Lord of the Rings)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:compulsive, decisive, efficient, flaky, irresponsible, pushy, reckless, violent

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE CAUTIOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Inebriation
PLOTLINE: Being in a situation with a high-stake “ticking clock” element
PLOTLINE: Having a goal that forces one to be reckless to succeed or win
PLOTLINE: Being in a situation where a risk needs to be taken
PLOTLINE: Facing a dangerous scenario where there isn’t time to plan
