CENTERED
DEFINITION:maintaining a healthy life view that promotes equilibrium; emotionally stable and focused

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:balanced, temperate

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having strong self-esteem
Being wise
Experiencing a past imbalance that led to unhappiness and a lack of fulfillment
Having parents who encouraged one to seek out happiness and peace

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Knowing one’s priorities
Having good sense and knowing one’s limitations
Satisfaction and contentment
Having a strong work-life balance
Appreciating what one has
Not being materialistic in nature
Having a good work ethic
Optimism
Respecting other people and their viewpoints
Desiring to learn and nourish the mind
Being well-read
Feeling pride in one’s accomplishments, large or small
Being able to ask for help when one needs it
Getting enough exercise and interacting with nature
Making time for reflection
Having a few hobbies or special interests
Setting aside schedules and routines to focus on what’s important
Striving for reasonable and attainable goals
Exploring one’s feelings honestly, either internally or with others
Viewing failure as a stepping stone and learning from it
Bouncing back from disappointment
Exhibiting good judgment
Thinking before acting
Being non-competitive
Not needing to prove oneself to others
Enjoying spontaneous activities that don’t include an element of risk
Practicing moderation (not eating or drinking too much, etc.)
Weighing one’s options and not rushing into decisions
Knowing the value of giving back
Living without regrets
Equally enjoying time with others and being alone
Making time for vacations and getaways
Doing what feels right instead of what others think one should do
Thinking deeply on certain topics that pertain to life in general
Feeling peace with one’s place in this world
Taking disappointment in stride
Giving back to others in a way that feels comfortable
Not working weekends
Being able to sayNowhen one is overcommitted or overwhelmed

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
The orchard will make a great day trip so the kids can see where apples come from.
I’ll get my errands done today and then make tomorrow a beach day.
Lorna is always working. Sure, she’s climbing the corporate ladder, but at what cost?
I guess a round of golf is out, but rainy days are always great for baking.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:curiosity, eagerness, gratitude, happiness, peacefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Centered characters exude confidence because they know themselves intimately and make decisions that lead to happiness. They do not get pulled into unhealthy activities like office politics, drama, or toxic relationships because these things threaten their centered state. Characters who are internally balanced have good priorities and steady emotions. The happiness of a centered character often prompts others to take control of their lives and find a better balance themselves.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters who derive satisfaction from their current lives are not as driven as those who are willing to make sacrifices to get what they want. In a job where hard work, dedication, and ambition are critical success factors, centered characters may find themselves passed over for promotions in favor of someone more driven.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:In the movieChocolat, Roux is a gypsy who floats along the river, stopping at towns along the way to work odd jobs and buy supplies. Though his people are feared and persecuted by many, Roux is comfortable with his beliefs and way of life. He works when he needs to, nurtures the healthy relationships that develop, and recognizes the value of kicking back and relaxing.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Nurse Thelma (The Bone Collector); Mr. Miyagi (The Karate Kid)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, disciplined, jealous, judgmental, perfectionistic, pushy, reckless, workaholic

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE BALANCED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Facing a financial crisis that requires one to work long hours
PLOTLINE: Being pressured by others to put more time and energy into one area of life
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a crisis of faith that causes one to doubt oneself and question priorities
PLOTLINE: Being asked to commit to many projects at once and feeling obligated to comply
