COOPERATIVE
DEFINITION:willing to work or collaborate with others

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:agreeable, helpful, obliging

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up with several siblings and sharing household chores
Living in a military family (or having a military background)
Being people-friendly
Being naturally community-minded
Having strong leadership abilities
Growing up in a family that ran a business

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Having an open mind
Asking questions to start the collaborative process
Knowing people by name
Having strong social skills
Being helpful and forthright
Having a strong sense of responsibility
Taking pride in one’s work
Honesty
Being polite
Choosing a career that relies on group efforts (being a chef in a restaurant, etc.)
Accountability
Encouraging others along the way:Great job with the flyer. It’s just what we need.
Being invested in the goal
Having an upbeat mood and positive outlook regarding the work needing to be done
Giving others a chance to speak or weigh in
SayingYes; generally being agreeable
Being willing to work hard
Being community-minded
Working with others with enthusiasm and energy
Carrying out tasks without argument
Being a peacemaker
Appreciating other people and their skills and sayingThank you
Being willing to try new things or new ideas
Being able to compromise
Showing up on time
Being prepared
Listening to what others have to say
Being able to follow another’s direction if needed
Putting the good of the team first
Dedication and loyalty
Noticing what needs to be done and stepping up to do it
Enjoying the feeling of camaraderie
Being respectful of the time and effort other members are putting forth
Dividing tasks based on the strengths and weaknesses of others
Taking pride in building, creating, or completing something
Paying attention to when people are struggling and finding a way to help

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Shredding all these files is going to take forever, but it has to be done.
Mark’s a fast worker. Between the two of us, we’ll have this place clean in no time.
I’m so glad Brenda is on my team. I’ve wanted to work with her since forever.
Lisanne likes to start early, so I’ll change my schedule.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:determination, eagerness, gratitude, hopefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Cooperative characters are easy to get along with, dedicated to the task, and invaluable team members. They understand that they can accomplish more by pooling the talents and resources of others than working alone. They are good listeners, respect their teammates, and take pride in group accomplishments.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Cooperative characters can sometimes assume that others are just as committed and willing to work as they themselves are, which can lead to trouble. Blindly depending on others to provide information and leadership can result in a less-than-satisfactory result. If others in the group lack dedication or passion, cooperative characters may find themselves taking on more than their share of responsibility in order to finish the job.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Dan Burns (Dan in Real Life) isn’t one to rock the boat. Although recently widowed, he agrees to go on a blind date when his family sets one up. When he does meet someone interesting and discovers that she’s dating his brother, he tries to bow out. His inclination is to go with the flow and keep peace, making him a cooperative, though passive, hero.Other Examples from Film and TV:Sam Weinberg (A Few Good Men), Stu Redman (The Stand), Mike Weston (The Following)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, apathetic, controlling, entitled, free-spirited, hostile, independent, suspicious, whiny

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE COOPERATIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working with someone who is used to getting his or her way
PLOTLINE: Being in a group or organization that lacks leadership and vision
PLOTLINE: Working with people who don’t seem to care about the goal
PLOTLINE: Working with a partner who creates drama for everyone involved
PLOTLINE: Dealing with personality clashes within a team or group
