COURTEOUS
DEFINITION:mannerly; considerate of others

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:chivalrous, conscientious, considerate, gallant, genteel, polite, respectful, well-mannered

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being brought up in an environment where politeness was seen as a virtue
Being inherently thoughtful and kind
Being taught to place others before oneself
Having empathy for others
The desire to be respected in turn; adhering to “The Golden Rule”
Fear (of disapproval, broken relationships, conflict, violence, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being neat and orderly
Having a strong work ethic
Being thoughtful and kind
Exhibiting good manners
Respecting the personal space of others
Being intuitive of the needs of others
Showing interest in others to make them feel important
Congratulating others for their accomplishments
Treating people fairly
Giving compliments:That color really suits you.
Factoring in the moods of others before bringing something up
Having a gentle manner
Offering to pitch in and help
Using a considerate tone
Giving people credit for their work and their ideas
Giving people one’s undivided attention (not taking phone calls or texting, etc.)
Showing appreciation for another’s time or effort
Having good table manners
Letting others go first (at the check-out counter, in traffic, when entering a room, etc.)
Serving others
Friendliness
Using a warm, inviting voice
Not abusing the power one may have over others
Deferring to others
Trying to foresee what others may need and providing it
Avoiding topics that make others uncomfortable
Not interrupting or laughing too loudly
Smiling and nodding encouragement as others are speaking
Respecting the privacy of others
Making introductions when someone new enters the conversation
Socializing with more than just one person at an event
Making others feel included and valued
Joking and lightly teasing only if it will put someone at ease or is appropriate
Apologizing if one has hurt someone’s feelings
Making suggestions without being pushy
Treating everyone with respect
Holding one’s tongue instead of lashing out

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Nicole looks flushed. Maybe I should offer to take her coat.
I see a few empty glasses. I better grab another bottle of wine.
I’ll run over and say hi to Emma so she’s not standing there all alone.
Mark’s divorce is still fresh; I’ll hang out with him and make sure he has fun tonight.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:gratitude, happiness, hopefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Courteous characters put the people around them at ease through their polite attentiveness. They can be relied on to behave appropriately in social situations and are often respected by others. In fictional scenarios when tensions run high, someone who is attentive and caring can defuse the situation and encourage others to open up about their fears and worries. When other characters show themselves to be self-absorbed, power hungry, or goal-driven, this trait can be a refreshing counterweight and supply contrast.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because courteous characters often think of others first, sometimes their own needs are not met. This can lead to a lack of fulfillment and personal happiness. These characters can also be targeted by others who view them as weak and decide to take advantage of them.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Atticus Finch (To Kill a Mockingbird) is a true southern gentleman. Although his principles set him at odds with many of his oldest friends and family, he remains courteous. He has more right than most to be angry and reactive, but whether he’s speaking to Mrs. Dubose, who has heinously insulted him, or standing between a lynch mob and an innocent man, Atticus maintains his composure and treats others with respect.Other Examples from Film:Hoke Colburn (Driving Miss Daisy), Chon Wang (Shanghai Noon)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:inflexible, know-it-all, proper, pushy, selfish

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE COURTEOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with disrespectful, dishonest, or drunk people
PLOTLINE: Being paired with a mistrustful person who was taken advantage of in the past
PLOTLINE: Being thrust into a survivalist situation where every person must fend for himself
PLOTLINE: Suffering a humiliation that gravely wounds one’s dignity
