CREATIVE
DEFINITION:having the power or inclination to bring new things into existence

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:artistic

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having nurturing, creative parents
The desire to make an imprint or leave something behind
Intense curiosity
Needing to connect with others in an emotional way
Being emotionally sensitive
Innate giftedness
Living in a creative community
Finding a void and wanting to fill it
Seeing and appreciating beauty in untraditional forms
The desire to be unique and wholly individual

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Eccentricity
Finding beauty in things that people take for granted
Being highly imaginative
Putting a unique spin on everything that one does
Having a strong social conscience
Expressiveness
Creative problem solving
A desire to know people’s stories and what makes them who they are
Being self-disciplined when it comes to one’s art
Persistence; sticking with a project until one’s goal has been achieved
Having an ear for pleasing sounds, such as music
Experiencing strong (sometimes manic) emotions
Adaptability
Being adventurous; wanting to experience different things
Spontaneity
Suffering self-doubt if others do not connect deeply with one’s creative works
Being intuitive and empathetic
Having an interest in mysteries and the unknown
Becoming excited when a new idea hits
Obsessing over the latest creative project
Growing quiet or seeming lost in thought
Intense concentration
Feeling hurt if others don’t take an interest in one’s work when it’s shared
Forgetting to attend to other details (skipping appointments, not eating properly, etc.)
Experimentation
Getting lost in daydreams
Thinking in metaphors
Wanting to evoke an emotional response in others
Having difficulty expressing oneself without an art medium (drawing, writing, etc.)
Seeing things the way they could be rather than how they currently are
Having a healthy attitude toward failure
Being creative in one’s appearance (through clothing choices, hairstyles, etc.)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Look at that old panhandler—there’s so much strength and beauty in his lined face.
Her red hair is so bright with the sun shining through it, like a phoenix rising from the ashes.
The sound of the wind scattering the dead leaves is so musical.
They named their dog “Blackie?” Couldn’t they come up with something more original?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:curiosity, desire, determination, eagerness, excitement, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Creative characters usually see the world a little differently than most and almost always have a fresh perspective to offer. The power of creation doesn’t come easily, so those who seek to create are usually determined, hardworking, and driven. These characters have a long-distance perspective that enables them to work through criticism, discouragement, and rejection.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because creative types tend to focus on their gifts, they may be somewhat out of touch with reality. This can lead to awkwardness or insecurity in social situations. Their focus on the muse can distract them from day-to-day practicalities, like housecleaning, paying the bills, and grocery shopping. The need to create can become so all-consuming that it leads to the neglect of important relationships, bringing about isolation. The path to creation is also rife with naysayers, turning some creative characters negative and jaded or instigating thoughts of self-doubt that lead to depression.

EXAMPLE FROM HISTORY:Michelangelo, one of the most famous artists in history, was an accomplished Italian sculptor, painter, and architect during the Renaissance. Despite being highly intelligent, he set aside a future as a scholar and dedicated himself to studying the arts. Following his passion for creating, he went on to sculpt “David” for the Florence Cathedral and painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.Other Examples from History:Pablo Picasso, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, William Shakespeare

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:analytical, callous, efficient, haughty, hypocritical, lazy, perfectionist, proper

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE CREATIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a handicap that affects one’s skill (losing one’s eyesight, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Finding beauty in something that goes against cultural norms and wanting to share it
PLOTLINE: Living in a culture where art is viewed as frivolous or a waste of time
PLOTLINE: Being so weighed down by responsibility that one has little time or energy to create
PLOTLINE: Living in the shadow of someone whose talents far surpass one’s own
PLOTLINE: Knowing someone who takes his talent for granted
