CURIOUS
DEFINITION:marked by the desire to investigate and learn

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:inquisitive

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a naturally inquisitive outlook
Growing up in an environment where exploration and asking questions was encouraged
The belief that there is always something more to be learned
Having a thirst for knowledge
The desire to right wrongs or make things better
Possessing an adventurous spirit

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Asking questions
Having strong observation skills
Pursuing knowledge (reading, researching, going to school, etc.)
Showing interest and enthusiasm when insight is shared
Seeking out people with similar interests
Taking things apart to see how they work
Going off on tangents rather than following a set plan
Listening in on the conversations of others
Difficulty paying attention on a task if something more interesting is present
Applying trial and error; learning by doing
Experimenting with new ideas or techniques; ingenuity
Collecting things
Showing disdain for rules, boundaries, and limits
Not becoming bored easily
Solving problems in innovative ways
Being intense when pursuing an interest
Mimicking or modeling similar discoveries in order to learn
Occasionally overstepping (asking questions that are inappropriate or too pointed, etc.)
Being willing to try new things
Impulsiveness
Wanting to improve and strengthen, or to create better processes
Losing track of time
Using errors, weaknesses, and flaws as a way to improve or innovate
Verbally working through one’s theories or questions
Joining groups or clubs
Taking risks to satisfy one’s curiosity
Making sacrifices in order to learn (interning or researching for no pay, etc.)
Deriving pleasure and satisfaction from new discoveries and experiences
Enjoying riddles, puzzles, and the unknown
Thinking about theWhat if?
Breaking rules in order to follow an idea or interest
Open honesty with others about one’s interests and aims
Obsessive tendencies
Trying something to see what it feels like or doing something to see what happens

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Look at the two of them whispering. I’ll corner Ella later and find out what’s going on.
Every day that woman comes alone to the playground. I wonder what her story is?
Interesting, how different animal species huddle together in specific environments.
The vacuum is still making that sound. Let’s take it apart and see what’s going on in there.
Before Harold casts his fishing line, he rolls his wrist. I need to ask him why he does that.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, curiosity, eagerness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Curious characters are drawn to problems or inconveniences that other people would choose to avoid. Their curiosity can make them adventurous, spurring them on to do things others wouldn’t do. They are often knowledgeable, either in a general way or about something specific. Characters who are curious easily stumble upon mysteries or involve themselves in dangerous matters; as such, they can conveniently introduce conflict into a story line.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Curious characters are often impulsive, acting without thinking. They can be single-minded to a fault—focusing on their pursuit (or being hopelessly distracted) and following whatever rabbit trail appears before them. Those who are curious are frequently more interested in their current topic of exploration than their relationships and may not understand or appreciate those without a similar level of curiosity.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Pippin Took, one of Frodo’s hobbit companions, is notoriously curious, which often leads to trouble. InThe Fellowship of The Ring, the companions are inside the dwarven city of Moria when Pippin touches an ancient sword, sending the fragile bones of a nearby skeleton clattering down an empty well. The noise that ensues summons a horde of orcs, and the fellowship is forced to fight to secure their freedom. Later, inThe Two Towers, Pippin’s insatiable desire to look inside the magical palantír leads him to steal the seeing stone from a sleeping Gandalf. By touching it, the hobbit accidentally forges a connection with Sauron himself, putting everyone in peril once more.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Alice in Wonderland, Fievel Mouskewitz (An American Tail), Curious George

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cautious, ignorant, impatient, irrational, know-it-all, pessimistic, stubborn, unhelpful

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE CURIOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with people who are protective of their knowledge
PLOTLINE: Living in a society where free thinking is discouraged
PLOTLINE: Being given tasks that require strict attention and focus
PLOTLINE: Working with people who lack drive or the desire to explore
