DECISIVE
DEFINITION:having the ability to make quick, efficient decisions; lacking hesitation

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:resolute

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Bearing responsibility from a young age
Having absent or reluctant parents
Having control issues
Being driven by the need to succeed
Having a strong sense of responsibility
The desire to lead

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Acquiring knowledge or skills to make informed decisions
Seeing things as black or white
Surrounding oneself with people who are skilled
Asking pointed questions:Can you guarantee that timeline?
Confidence
Needing a plan of action at all times
Appearing certain even when one is not
Demanding honesty and compliance
Placing one’s trust in only those who have earned it
Choosing to lead rather than follow
Becoming frustrated with people who can’t commit or make decisions
Disliking ambiguity
Fully committing to every decision; not second-guessing oneself
Being strong-willed
Knowing what one wants and needs in a given situation
Being highly logical and rational
Being goal oriented
Placing the mission before other people’s emotions
Tackling problems and situations directly
Being in tune with one’s emotions
Being able to motivate others
Having a strong work ethic
Independence
Being organized
Having confidence and self-esteem
Not being ruled by fear or regret (but sometimes being in denial)
Taking risks
Assertiveness
Being a strong problem solver
Taking advantage of opportunities
Feeling anger or frustration if one makes a mistake
Accepting responsibility and learning from one’s missteps
Having a positive attitude
Determination
Making day-to-day decisions quickly (what to wear, what to order off the menu, etc.)
Trusting one’s gut instinct

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Why does she make this so difficult? Just pick a restaurant and be done with it.
Becky knows she has homework. Why doesn’t she just sit down and do it?
I like what the candidate had to say. He’s the logical choice to vote for.
If we elope, we can avoid the million details and family drama and get on with our lives.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, impatience, irritation, scorn

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Decisive characters inspire confidence because of their faith in their decisions. Once they commit to a course of action, they look firmly ahead, never doubting their choices. These characters are responsible and make good leaders. They are often a driving force for change in the world.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Unfortunately, these characters can be so invested in their decisions that they’re reluctant to change direction, even when events take a turn for the worse. Since they usually do make good decisions, it can be difficult for them to admit it when they’ve made a mistake. Because these characters draw their conclusions based on logic, they can grow impatient with others who place a more emotional value on their choices. This can lead to friction and frustration on all sides.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:James T. Kirk of theStar Trekfranchise thinks on his feet and makes decisions quickly. He doesn’t prevaricate or second-guess himself. When trouble arises, he assesses the situation, seeks counsel from trusted colleagues when necessary, weighs his options, and takes action. Sometimes his decisiveness makes him rash and reckless, but in his high-risk position as a commander of a Starfleet ship and crew, his ability to make quick decisions serves him well.Other Examples from History and Film:George S. Patton, Gordon Gekko (Wall Street), Captain Miller (Saving Private Ryan)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:defensive, easygoing, flaky, foolish, forgetful, gullible, indecisive, irresponsible, lazy, worrywart

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE DECISIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having to make choices with a partner who is wishy-washy
PLOTLINE: Working in a field where one is restrained by rules, safety committees, and regulations
PLOTLINE: Having to make a decision in an area where one lacks knowledge
PLOTLINE: Knowing the right thing to do but being held back by a partner who refuses to listen to reason
PLOTLINE: Making decisions only to have them overridden by one’s employer
