DIPLOMATIC
DEFINITION:skilled at handling people while respecting their needs

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:tactful

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up with two or more siblings
Being responsible for people whose views, attitudes, and needs differ
Working in management or politics
Obtaining a position of power and wanting to keep it
Having a strong sense of teamwork and community
Valuing fairness and respect
Being strongly empathetic
Having an intuitive nature
Being the peacemaker in a family that often clashes
Acting as a caregiver or support worker for those with chronic illnesses or mental instabilities

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Acknowledging others and their needs as valid and important
Showing respect
Being a strong listener
Thinking before acting
Being able to put oneself into someone else’s shoes
Being trustworthy
Treating everyone fairly and without bias
Speaking in a neutral tone
Having an aptitude for reasoning and logic
Repeating the facts so there are no misunderstandings for anyone
Defusing high emotions by remaining calm and reasonable
Building people up in a genuine manner
Offering opinions that show respect for everyone involved
Speaking tactfully about past mistakes
Not assigning blame unless it can be done in an instructive way
Offering opinions on how to work together for the best outcome
Holding to one’s beliefs and ideals
Avoiding negative language such asI don’t like that,orThat won’t work,etc.
Offering ideas and solutions for change
Positivity
Hesitating in order to choose one’s words carefully
Not being aggressive
Respecting other people’s boundaries and personal distance
Maintaining strong eye contact
Offering a joke or comment to defuse tension
Showing kindness when correcting someone’s misconception or mistake
Offering honesty—but carefully, in a way that won’t cause offense
Avoiding arguments; having strong negotiating skills
Leading by example
Being willing to compromise
Being highly aware of people’s emotions and working to avoid hurt feelings
Sharing a personal struggle in an effort to put people at ease
Paying close attention to and accurately interpreting the body language of others

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Brenda’s mad about not being invited to Erica’s party. I’ll step in if this gets ugly.
I need to show them they can help one another since they’re both after the same thing.
If the kids swap chores every few weeks, then no one can complain about it being unfair.
When Dad visits, I’ll show him how safe the city is. He’ll feel better about my move here.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, hopefulness, resignation, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Diplomatic characters are often wise, far-seeing, and intelligent. They can remove themselves emotionally from a situation and are skilled at providing insight that helps others make good decisions. Natural peacemakers, these characters don’t let passion rule them. They are careful with their words, seeking out information, investigating, and obtaining feedback before weighing in or offering potential solutions. A diplomatic character is able to be supportive, loyal, and trustworthy without judging, and so make good confidantes.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Diplomacy can be draining; when a diplomatic character has strong feelings and needs to vent, he may be reluctant to do so out of fear of damaging his reputation. Friends may frequently bring their disputes, beefs, and arguments to him, expecting to be heard and counseled. This can lead to high stress and unhappiness, as well as a sense of frustration born from knowing that whatever is decided, someone will always be dissatisfied with the outcome. A diplomatic character can also be viewed by others as manipulative, since his ability to read and persuade others can be used to his personal advantage.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Alfred Pennyworth, Bruce Wayne’s serving man in theBatmanfranchise, tactfully handles all manner of affairs for his employer whilst maintaining the secrecy of Bruce’s identity. As a confidante, he fulfills his role while being both a mentor and moral compass for Bruce, whose judgment is sometimes clouded by the negativity of Gotham City’s criminal underworld.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Gray Grantham (The Pelican Brief), Sean Maguire (Good Will Hunting)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:defensive, dishonest, impulsive, jaded, suspicious, sweet, unhelpful, whimsical

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE DIPLOMATIC CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Remaining diplomatic when one has personal stakes in the outcome
PLOTLINE: Trying to help others find middle ground when one is morally opposed to their goal
PLOTLINE: Being diplomatic in the face of disrespect, confrontation, threats, and manipulation
