DISCIPLINED
DEFINITION:exhibiting willpower and self-control

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:self-controlled

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being strongly dedicated to a goal or belief
Being raised in a devout household
Participating in competitive sports
Having role models who were disciplined and dedicated

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Adhering to long-term routines or patterns
Making sacrifices to achieve one’s goals
Honing one’s skills in an effort to improve
Being strong-willed
Having a strong moral barometer
Resisting temptation in all forms
Being a hard worker
Integrity and focus
Making sacrifices for what is important
Self-respect
Difficulty compromising
Being able to filter out distractions
Cutting out relationships and influencers that go against one’s goals
Having a serious demeanor when it comes to seeking achievement
Seeking out mentors who can help one improve
Willingness to train or hone one’s talents or traits
Challenging one’s limits; pushing oneself to strive harder
Taking pride in one’s accomplishments and hard work
Avoiding situations where one might be tempted to break one’s resolve
Carefully controlling one’s emotions
Having a sense of duty (to oneself or others)
Being encouraged by small improvements
Putting business before pleasure
Working out or adhering to a diet to meet one’s goal
Making concessions in other areas to stay on track
Using one’s time productively
Feeling accomplished when one defeats temptations
Optimism and determination
Refusing to give up or give in
Having a plan to reach one’s goal
Having well-defined priorities
Being a good manager of one’s time
Being attentive to details

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’d like to go out, but I need to get to bed early so I’m ready for tomorrow.
If I save up my tips for the next three months, I can take that trip to Mexico.
Working through the weekend will help me get this project back on schedule.
It would be easy to give up, but I’d always regret it.
I’d love some dessert, but my diet’s going so well. I don’t want to sabotage it.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, desire, determination, hopefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Disciplined characters are focused and determined with concrete goals. They’re strong planners, choosing the best and most direct course of action in order to achieve a desired result. Because discipline is a trait that many people desire but few can honestly claim, characters exemplifying this attribute are often admired and respected by their peers.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Disciplined characters are sometimes so focused on what they want that they marginalize friends and loved ones; this can be especially hurtful when these supporting characters have sacrificed in order to further the character’s desires. In addition, disciplined characters don’t always set reasonable boundaries when it comes to their passions; when this happens, their dedication can put them in danger or bring about physical harm. Discipline can escalate into an unhealthy obsession, and if one gives in to temptation as a reward, feelings of failure and self-loathing may follow.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:He may not be the smartest guy on the block, but Rocky Balboa (Rocky) has strength of will when it comes to training. He gets up early every morning to run, eats an unappetizing but protein-packed breakfast of raw eggs, and puts his body through the ringer to get into peak physical shape. He even attempts to remain celibate during training, but…well, he’s a boxer, not a saint.Other Examples from Film:Captain Von Trapp (The Sound of Music), Kate Moseley (The Cutting Edge)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:dependent, gentle, influential, innocent, manipulative, needy, proper, sentimental, whiny

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE DISCIPLINED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Remaining disciplined during times of doubt and insecurity
PLOTLINE: Facing a temptation that is as tantalizing as one’s original goal
PLOTLINE: Having an identity crisis that forces one to reevaluate the current path
PLOTLINE: Suffering an emotional hurt or physical setback
PLOTLINE: Having one’s discipline take an unhealthy turn (weight obsessions, perfectionism, etc.)
