DISCREET
DEFINITION:intentionally unobtrusive; conducting oneself with care, sound judgment, and a respect for privacy

CATEGORIES:interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:circumspect, prudent

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a respectful nature
Loyalty
Growing up during a time when secrets were important (the Cold War, WWII, etc.)
Working within an industry where sensitive information must be protected
Being exposed to danger (civil unrest, political takeovers, high crime, etc.) in the past
Being raised in the public eye (growing up in a political, famous, or wealthy family, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Keeping secrets
Controlling the flow of information for the greater good
Being careful with one’s words; being tactful
Seeking out information in an effort to be well-informed
Protecting others by omitting the truth
Wearing clothing that is nondescript or unremarkable
Moderating one’s movements to avoid being the focus of attention
Thinking logically and planning ahead
Being careful with one’s personal information
Maintaining control of one’s emotions
Avoiding situations where it’s easy to lose control (drinking too much, etc.)
Being observant and watchful
Asking careful questions while keeping one’s motivation to oneself
Being trustworthy and reliable
Respecting privacy
Thinking before acting; being risk-averse
Being protective
Taking on sensitive duties to ensure they’re done correctly
Being slow to trust others
Self-restraint
Modesty and humility
Keeping information to oneself
Advising when necessary; keeping the confidences of others
Answering questions in a generic way
Changing the subject to protect one’s privacy
Trivializing to avoid revealing anything:I won’t bore you with the details.
Being gifted at diplomacy
Paying attention to details; being aware of one’s surroundings
Having a quiet demeanor or air of mystery
Using flattery to put people at ease
Dealing sensitively with people
Ignoring or deftly handling pointed inquiries or information demands
Avoiding disruptions through careful planning
Gathering information without being obvious
Having a good sense of timing

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I wish she wouldn’t ask such personal questions. Those secrets aren’t mine to tell.
I’ll keep Lorna away from Dan so he doesn’t accidentally blab about her surprise party.
If I take the late train, I shouldn’t run into anyone who knows me.
All he needs to know is to be outside the restaurant at eight. I’ll handle the rest.
Listen to Mike brag about how much money he makes. He’s going to alienate his friends.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:determination, reluctance, resentment, skepticism, sympathy, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Discreet characters are aware of the social climate and the possible dangers to their well-being and the well-being of others. They are protective of privacy, be it their own or a loved one’s, and have sound judgment in knowing what to say and do to properly handle the flow of information. These characters make decisions based on strong observation skills, they know what to say and to whom, and they’re careful not to ruffle feathers as they work to maintain a low profile.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because discreet characters have an objective of keeping certain information away from others, they may appear to be closed-off or secretive, which isn’t a strong foundation for friendship. Out of necessity, discreet characters may manipulate others, which can hurt their integrity or the integrity of those they are protecting. These characters tend to be very private; when they accomplish something special, others may never know of their role in the event, which can lessen the satisfaction for a character longing for appreciation and recognition.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:InArgo(a film loosely based on real events), Tony Mendez is a CIA operative who goes undercover to rescue six trapped American diplomats from Iran. Acting as a movie producer scouting locations for a fictitious film, he handles Iranian officials by saying and doing exactly what is needed to maintain his cover. Keeping a low profile, he carefully educates the diplomats so they can pull off their fake film crew roles and escape. Once on American soil, Tony remains secretive about his involvement in the rescue for the greater good of protecting American prisoners of war still in Iran.Other Examples from Film:Father Bobby Carillo (Sleepers), Aaron/Roy Stampler (Primal Fear)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:alert, impulsive, intelligent, nosy, reckless, suspicious, tactless, uncooperative, uninhibited

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE DISCREET CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Catching a trusted friend in a lie
PLOTLINE: Making a mistake that causes conflict for the person one is trying to protect
PLOTLINE: Being asked to breech another’s privacy for the greater good
PLOTLINE: Finding oneself caught between opposing people or goals
PLOTLINE: Having one’s privacy invaded and one’s secrets revealed as a result
