EASYGOING
DEFINITION:casual in manner and mindset

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:carefree, happy-go-lucky, lackadaisical, laid-back, mellow, relaxed

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having fun-loving parents who went with the flow
Being confident in oneself
Being naturally contented and satisfied
Believing that things happen for a reason and one must let go of things beyond one’s control
Growing up in an overly strict or highly stressful environment and choosing to live differently

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Happiness
Having a non-competitive nature
Acting as a peacemaker when there are conflicts
Having a calm and agreeable demeanor
Having fun without worrying about the judgment of others
Avoiding stress
Being willing to show one’s emotions
Honesty
Being low maintenance
Not taking pains with one’s appearance
Working to live, not living to work
Enjoying holidays and weekends
Making time for one’s interests
Encouraging others to not worry and enjoy life
Enjoying achievements when they happen
Thoughtfulness
Spontaneity
A sense of fairness; being uncompetitive
Doing things last minute as opposed to planning ahead
Working well in a group setting
Not feeling compelled to lead; being content to follow
Preferring loose timelines rather than set deadlines
Tardiness
Easily overlooking offenses; forgiving and forgetting
Sleeping in
Being free of most worry
Thinking positively
Patience
Having a good sense of humor
Being even-keeled; not being easily upset
Not worrying about success; just enjoying the experience
Being friendly and accepting of others
Having a go-with-the-flow attitude that allows one to fit in with many different groups
Being slow to anger
Deriving energy from the happiness of others
Having an open mind
Being at peace with oneself
Preferring to let others make decisions

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Whatever movie Debbie picks, I know I’ll enjoy it.
The other team deserves to win. They definitely outplayed us today.
I don’t think I could do Rick’s job, with all those deadlines and long hours.
This camping trip will be so much fun. Even if it rains, we’ll play cards and catch up.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, confidence, happiness, indifference, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Easygoing characters are comfortable to be around. They’re laid-back and take life as it comes. Rather than stress over things that are out of their control, they go with the flow and enjoy the positives. Characters with this trait don’t worry about winning or losing or chasing success; they simply enjoy the experience.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Easygoing characters don’t always have the same priorities as other people. Their mellow approach to life may lead others to believe that they’re apathetic or lack passion. Being easygoing means not being concerned with things that may be important to others, like punctuality, orderliness, or ambition. This difference in priorities can cause conflict with characters who value such things.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:In the course of his life, Forrest Gump encounters more than his share of danger and stress. But he takes everything in stride. Whether he’s being forced to wear “magic shoes,” saying goodbye to his best friend in the middle of a firefight, caring for a bitter paraplegic, or raising his young son on his own, Forrest doesn’t get rattled. He faces each challenge with a positive attitude and an open mind, ready to learn from what the day has to offer.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Novalee Nation (Where the Heart Is), Will Freeman (About a Boy)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, introverted, judgmental, melodramatic, needy, nervous, obsessed, suspicious, workaholic

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE EASYGOING CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Seeing a friend or loved one in chronic pain and being unable to help
PLOTLINE: Suffering an injustice (not being covered by insurance due to an administrative error, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having a desire or need so important that one would do anything to obtain it
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a tragedy or disaster that pulls one out of one’s temperate emotional range
