EMPATHETIC
DEFINITION:able to recognize and identify with the emotions of others

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:sensitive, understanding

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being deeply attuned to emotion
Having heightened intuition
Being strongly self-aware
Feeling in sync with the energy of other people
Having a compassionate nature
Being taught the importance of love and compassion at a young age

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being highly sympathetic
Experiencing another’s emotion as if it was one’s own
Having a strong connection to other people
Trustworthiness and honesty
Having a quiet, contemplative nature
Being genuine; showing an interest in others
Influencing the attitudes of others by projecting certain feelings and moods
Being sensitive to the emotional pain of others
Offering comfort when it is needed
Listening actively
Enjoying working with animals or being around them
Heightened awareness of expression through body language and voice tone
Being able to sense “fake” emotions
Seeing past actions and words to discern the truth
Being altruistic
Finding it difficult to put one’s needs first
Reluctance to share emotions too fully for fear of being overwhelmed
Deeply respecting all living things
Pondering the meaning of life and one’s role within it
Wisdom
Being able to describe what another’s emotion feels like (visceral sensations, etc.)
Having strong values and ideals
Wanting to help others or fix their problems
Avoiding places where painful emotions are abundant (cancer wards, prisons, etc.)
Wanting to share happiness and positivity
Championing humane causes
Understanding the importance of giving and receiving
Sometimes feeling overwhelmed by emotion
Being an introvert
Treating others the way one wishes to be treated
Spiritualism
Volunteering; participating in projects of goodwill
Feeling overwhelmed by emotions; needing to retreat to a quiet place
Experiencing pain echoes (true empaths)
Wanting to be left alone
Needing time alone to recharge and clear one’s head
Having a difficult time letting go of the pain of others
Forming deep, meaningful relationships
Avoiding toxic people and situations

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Devon acts strong, but I know he’s just worried that people will think he’s weak.
The hate pouring off that man is incredible. I can see right through his false smile.
I need to help that family who lost their home. What a horrible thing to go through.
A funny movie will get Max out of his funk.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anguish, conflicted, desire, eagerness, gratitude, love, sympathy

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Characters with a strong sense of empathy make good friends and lovers. They are good listeners, genuinely care, and want the best for other people. They try to foster positivity and enjoy the communal energy of sharing their happy emotions. Their ability to walk in other people’s shoes allows them to have a deeper understanding of problematic situations and react in a way that will improve the emotional landscape for everyone involved. These characters can also convert their empathy into a passion for change, making them strong champions for causes that improve the quality of life for others.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While positive emotions affect empathetic characters in an uplifting way, negative emotions can be toxic, dragging them into a dark place. Unless they are able to shield themselves, some may pick up the emotions or pain of others and experience the same hurt themselves. This can make interacting with others difficult, leading them to withdraw and become reclusive. In addition, being sensitive and showing true concern can be a double-edged sword for empathetic characters when others use them as a dumping ground for their worries, fears, and frustrations. Too much of this can lead to emotional strain and depression.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Oskar Schindler (Schindler’s List) begins his story as a war profiteer in Germany, but upon witnessing the Nazi liquidation of the Kraków ghetto, he finds himself compelled to help the Jews who remain. By the end of the war, although he has saved over a thousand lives, he is heartbroken at the thought of the lost ones he might have helped had he done more.Other Examples from Film:Dr. Malcolm Crowe (The Sixth Sense), John Coffey (The Green Mile), Deanna Troi (Star Trek: The Next Generation)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:analytical, antisocial, cautious, confrontational, cruel, hateful, melodramatic, volatile, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE EMPATHETIC CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Interacting with those who lack empathy, such as someone with antisocial personality disorder
PLOTLINE: Being exposed to many conflicting emotions at once
PLOTLINE: Being paired with someone who lack morals and doesn’t value life
PLOTLINE: Living with someone who is chronically ill
