EMPATHY
DEFINITION:To intimately identify with (and possibly experience) another’s feelings through the ability to place oneself in their emotional shoes

NOTES:Sympathy and empathy are close in nature but aren’t the same. Empathy occurs when a character feels connected to someone through a meaningful shared emotional experience. Sympathy is more surface-level, prompting one to provide comfort and support without necessarily becoming personally attached. For ideas on the latter, please view the SYMPATHY entry.

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
A softening of the features
Eyebrows drawing together
A pained look (if one is sharing another’s negative feelings)
Steady eye contact that is comforting, not invasive
Offering a small smile that communicates acceptance
Reaching out to touch (to show connectedness)
Choosing words with care (to show understanding, be inclusive, or raise someone up)
Leaning in to listen without interrupting (no judgment)
Moving closer; closing the distance
One’s body facing the other person straight on
Cupping a shoulder or placing a hand on the other’s back to provide comfort while wishing someone would offer this comfort in return
Rubbing at one’s own chest and the pain or tightness one feels there
Adopting a soft tone, rich with understanding and acceptance
Asking questions to allow the other to experience the relief of answering as it will help them better understand their own narrative
Crying with the other person
Physical contact (knees or legs touching, pulling the other in, etc.)
Mirroring the posture and body language of whomever one is connecting with
Going to someone and offering to talk or just sit with them
Cancelling plans or appointments to be fully present in the moment
Using empathetic foresight to lessen another’s burdens (safeguarding their privacy, offering care, handling tasks for them, etc.)
Acknowledging a shared burden:This is so hard, isn’t it?
Verbalizing and sharing happy feelings:Today couldn’t be better, could it?
Increased touchy-feely behaviors (holding hands for an extended time, drawing the other in so shoulders touch, etc.) when the experience is joyful
Consoling the person verbally:I know it’s difficult,orWe’ll get through this together.
Offering truth (e.g., sharing a personal experience to provide the other person comfort)
Physical affection (squeezing another’s hand, hugging, holding them close, a kiss on the cheek if it is appropriate, etc.)

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
A sharp pain in the chest
Tightness in the throat
A feeling of overall heaviness
Difficulty swallowing due to having a lump in the throat and holding back tears
Shakiness or weakness (if one’s emotions are overwhelming)
The sensation of phantom pain
A light, floaty feeling in the chest (if the situation is pleasing)

MENTAL RESPONSES:
A need to help or fix (if the situation is negative) or a desire to enjoy the moment (if the circumstances are positive)
Feeling frustration when others don’t understand the situation as one does
The ability to forgive quickly by attributing any wrongdoings to stress and circumstances Disconnecting from personal concerns to take on the emotions and concerns of another
A desire to escape before one’s painful emotions become visible
Feeling discomfort at witnessing another’s physical pain
Being mindful and tactful when others are in emotional stress
Wanting to remove another’s suffering while being aware of one’s inability to do so
Letting go of prejudice or pre-conceived notions and focusing on connection

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Being despondent because the pain is too much
Feeling emotionally drained or depressed
A need to be alone to sort out one’s feelings after the crisis has passed
Showing kindness and compassion whatever the situation
Pessimism or disillusionment brought on by an inability to see a reason for suffering
Feeling light, a renewed sense of optimism when the moment of empathy is positive

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
A voice that sounds “off” (choked with emotion, gravelly, etc.)
Words that don’t match behavior (saying something gruff while showing compassion)
Backing down from a tough stance:You can stay the night. Or…a few nightsif you need to.

MAY ESCALATE TO:Admiration,Humbled,Valued,Love

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Connectedness,Hopefulness,Peacefulness

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Accept, awaken, brush, care
clasp, connect, develop, echo
encourage, endure, entrust, entwine
evoke, express, feel, hold
hug, link, listen, love
need, nurture, relive, respond
seek, sense, squeeze, stir
touch, undergo, weave together

WRITER’S TIP:In some situations, your character will be emotionally steady while in others, they will be a hot mess. For the latter, ask yourself why this is. If it is the result of an unresolved emotional wound, how can you can use this to further the inner conflict of the story?