ENTHUSIASTIC
DEFINITION:frequently feeling or exhibiting much excitement

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:ardent, ebullient, excitable, exuberant, hyper

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
ADHD/ADD
Being highly creative and passionate
Being free-spirited
Being excessively energetic
Curiosity
Immaturity
Having an optimistic outlook
Needing action or adventure; being an extrovert
The desire to perform or prove oneself to others
Medication or diet
Being a highly intelligent person who is consistently under-stimulated

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Preferring to be part of a group
Infectious laughter
Speaking rapidly
Touching for effect
Impatient movements
Acting without thought
Agreeing without always thinking things through
Organizing fun events and gatherings
Being energized by music and people
Volunteering to help with whatever needs doing
Giving one’s all to a project that one is excited about
Generating lots of ideas and voicing them
Showing pride in one’s town, sport teams, country, etc.
Impatience if other people are slow to move or act
Talking incessantly about the object of one’s enthusiasm
Bouncing back quickly from negative experiences
Getting involved with projects in one’s community
Attempting to win people over and join in one’s enthusiasm
Focusing on the future more than the past
Enjoying the moment
Asking questions
Smiling often
Engaging in wrestling and horseplay
Wanting to see and experience new things
Making others feel valued through enthusiastic greetings
Forming fast friendships
Using lots of hand gestures
Not always knowing where personal boundaries are
Movements that exude energy (bouncing a foot, tapping the tabletop, etc.)
Speaking in a loud, boisterous voice
Rushing through responsibilities that don’t generate excitement

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Our float is going to be the best one in the parade!
The boating trip will be awesome. I wish the weekend would hurry up and get here!
What an incredible organization. I can’t wait to see how I can help.
Look at that offensive line. Our team’s gonna win!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, desire, excitement, happiness, hopefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Enthusiastic characters are passionate. Whatever idea or organization they espouse, they are loyal and dedicated to it, often taking on undesirable roles or background positions that others may reject. Their zeal is infectious and their exuberance can be the catalyst to spurring fence-sitters into action.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Enthusiastic characters may be passionate, but they don’t always think things through. Their excitement for an organization or upcoming event may give them an unrealistically rosy view and render them blind to faults and red flags. Others might view these characters as childish and simple and may not take them seriously. Enthusiastic characters may become so excitable that they take projects over, creating friction with other team members.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:It’s Buddy the elf’s (Elf) nature to face each day with enthusiasm. Although momentarily dismayed upon discovering that he’s not an actual elf, he recovers quickly, throwing himself into the adventure of finding his real dad in the strange and wonderful world of New York City.Other Examples from TV and Film:Barney Fife (The Andy Griffith Show), Rod Tidwell (Jerry Maguire)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:abrasive, cocky, grumpy, irresponsible, patient, pessimistic, temperamental

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ENTHUSIASTIC CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Participating in activities where emotional displays are a detriment (poker, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Learning that the object of one’s enthusiasm is not what it appeared to be
PLOTLINE: Being the only enthusiast in a crowd of naysayers and wet blankets
PLOTLINE: Enthusiastically supporting an organization that most people believe to be a sham
