EXTROVERTED
DEFINITION:outgoing; socially adept

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:gregarious, outgoing, sociable

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Genetics
Being an adrenaline junkie
Getting one’s energy from other people
An adventurous upbringing (being exposed to new cultures and experiences, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Having an outward focus (on other people, experiences, etc.) rather than an inward one
Feeling confident in social situations
Being friendly and chatty
Being motivational
Seeking new pursuits and experiences
Being adventurous
Enjoying large venues, events, and crowds
Being reward-focused
Being socially adept and gifted at small talk
Becoming easily bored
Thinking while speaking; working things out verbally
Buying tickets to concerts or entertainment events
Making the first move (approaching others, striking up a conversation, etc.)
Impulsiveness
Stepping outside of one’s comfort zone
Being outgoing
Competitiveness
Being productive with one’s time
Enjoying traveling and meeting new people
Going to parties and hosting events
Laughing and joking with others
Texting and calling people to stay connected
Needing constant activity and stimulation
Asking direct questions rather than beating around the bush
Being a thrill seeker
Having many friendships rather than only one or two
Cheerfulness and high-spiritedness
Spontaneity:Let’s head out to the farm and have a bonfire!
Having difficulty expressing one’s feelings
Always moving and doing
Feeling energetic and enthusiastic in social situations
Seeking and taking advantage of opportunities
Being trendy (buying the latest technology, staying current with fashions, etc.)
Enjoying team sports
Craving attention
Openly sharing ideas and opinions
Listening to loud music
Being active on social media

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Perfect temperature for a swim. I’ll call around to see who’s up for water polo.
I can’t wait for Zack’s party. It’s going to be epic!
That’s it—I’m ditching this conference. There must be something fun to do in this town.
I love these tights, but if I show up in them, the girls will laugh me out of the office.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, eagerness, excitement, happiness, pride, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Extroverted characters are almost never alone; they thrive in the company of others. They enjoy getting out, trying new experiences, and meeting new people. These characters are confident in most social situations and can mingle well. They often have a large group of friends and can be very spontaneous and open-minded. Their enthusiasm will affect others and bring up the energy level of any gathering.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Extroverted characters are easily bored and require almost constant stimulation. This can be exhausting for friends who are not so outgoing or lean toward being introverted. Their desire for something new and exciting can lead to rashness and poor decisions. They are also reward-driven and can be very competitive, causing friction among friends and colleagues.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:In the movieThe Talented Mr. Ripley, wealthy Dickie Greenleaf is living in Italy to escape his stuffy and controlling parents back in the United States. In constant need of excitement and adventure, Dickie is a natural extrovert, getting his energy from being out with his many friends at jazz clubs and bars. He travels extensively, moving to new locales when his current scene gets boring.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Elle Woods (Legally Blonde), Bridget Vreeland (The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:calm, introverted, patient, perfectionist, proper, reckless, sentimental, untrusting

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE EXTROVERTED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being forced to attend long, drawn-out ceremonies (Sunday mass, weddings, funerals, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being stuck (in an elevator, for instance) with no stimulation until help arrives
PLOTLINE: Falling in love with an introvert
PLOTLINE: Having a job that requires one to be alone for long periods of time (a truck driver, etc.)
