FLAMBOYANT
DEFINITION:striking or colorful in behavior and appearance

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:colorful, dashing, glamorous

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of identity
Needing to express oneself as an individual
Growing up in a home that encouraged exploration
Being highly creative
The desire to create drama
Playfulness

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Dressing distinctively in any situation
Having a totem symbol for one’s individuality (a fedora, mismatched socks, etc.)
Being fashion-forward; creating trends rather than following them
Making an entrance
Using grand gestures
Being showy or flashy
Enjoying attention
Extravagance
Having a big personality
Getting energy from other people and being on display
Posing for effect
Raising one’s voice to be heard over a crowd
Expressiveness
Having a strong sense of humor
Being hygienic
Keeping strong eye contact
Using the voice distinctively (using dramatic pauses, tone shifts, an accent, etc.)
Choosing a signature look (a haircut no one else is brave enough to try, etc.)
Optimism and a positive outlook
Taking criticism well
Being attentive to detail
Having a passion for life and an adventurous spirit
Accessorizing with jewelry or adornments to make oneself stand out
Testing boundaries and traditional ideas
Having strong social skills
Enthusiasm
Entertaining others
Bringing up the energy in a room
Enjoying shock value:For Halloween I’m going to be a fishing net!
Being highly imaginative and creative
Owning one’s look; confidence
Growing bored by the same look

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
My hair is so blah. I’m going to shake things up and dye it orange.
A cape is perfect for the prom. I love it!
Looks like Jay’s ready to highjack the DJ’s booth. Time for my grand entrance!
The only way to pull off a look like this is to own it.
After I show up in this body paint, book club will never be the same.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, anticipation, confidence, eagerness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Flamboyant characters are high-spirited and have a flair for the dramatic. They bring up the energy of the room and are skilled at drawing every eye to them. These characters are often admired for their individuality, their confidence, and their sense of fun and flash.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with a flamboyant flair draw attention—but not always the positive kind. People who are more reserved may alienate or ridicule them. These characters may also be pressured to conform rather than be admired for their willingness to be themselves. There is also a danger for flamboyant characters to become addicted to attention and take excessive pride in their sense of style, leading to narcissism.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Captain Jack Sparrow fromThe Pirates of the Caribbeanfranchise has a flair for the dramatic, dressing much better than the average pirate and frequently adopting poses and gestures that draw an audience. He wears kohl eyeliner to make his eyes more intimidating and utilizes his voice to pull attention, deepening his tone for effect and emphasizing certain words to get emotion and meaning across.Other Examples from Film, Literature, and Pop Culture:Oda Mae Brown (Ghost), Caesar Flickerman (theHunger Gamestrilogy), Lady Gaga

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:haughty, introverted, judgmental, proper, sensitive, shy, sophisticated, temperamental, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE FLAMBOYANT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with others who make assumptions about one’s sexuality (especially for males)
PLOTLINE: Interacting with people who believe that one’s actions are inappropriate
PLOTLINE: Having a crisis of faith over one’s identity
PLOTLINE: Living in a culture where freedom of expression is highly discouraged
PLOTLINE: Having to blend in out of necessity (serving a jail term, government scrutiny, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Facing hate, ignorance, or discrimination because of one’s stylistic choices
