FLIRTATIOUS
DEFINITION:inclined to provocative teasing and suggestive attention

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:amorous, coquettish, provocative

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of playfulness
Being confident in one’s sexuality
Feeling a biological need to find a mate and reproduce
Having control issues

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Making suggestive comments that can be taken sexually
Choosing a target and conveying interest through words and actions
Lavishing praise and compliments
Leaning in toward another person
Entering someone’s personal space
Drawing attention to the mouth (licking one’s lips, playful biting a straw, etc.)
Offering a suggestive smile
Looking people in the eye
Laughing in a deep, sensual way
Playful joking
Being more touchy-feely than normal
Speaking in a lower-pitched voice
Dressing to attract (sexual) attention
Wearing perfume or cologne in hopes that it will be noticed and enjoyed
Suggesting a future meeting:We should go to a movie sometime,orYou like Italian?
Light teasing
Blushing
Employing coquettish mannerisms (a darting glance, a shy smile, etc.)
Stroking the hair, exposing the throat, pointing one’s body toward the other person
Offering lingering touches
Asking questions to judge a target’s interest level
Furtively looking someone up and down
Sharing things (lunch, a locker, one’s personal items, etc.)
Asking or answering questions that require honesty and vulnerability
Focusing on someone’s physical attributes:I love your dress. It looks…wow.
Tilting the head and giving a slight smile
Borrowing an item so one will have a reason to return it and see the person again
Trading numbers, emails, or contact information
Showing confidence (open body posture, chest thrust out, asking brazen questions, etc.)
Acting silly and suggestive
Enjoying the effect one has on a target
Showing an interest in what the other person finds important
Touching the lips, neck, or face
“Accidentally” bumping into someone to manufacture an opportunity to talk
Asking for someone’s help or advice as a way of starting a conversation
Acting protective in small ways (walking a date to her car, etc.)
Frequent and playful texting

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I think I’ll just bump into Matt at the bus stop and see what happens.
Lori’s finally alone. Now’s a good time to buy her a drink.
If I act like I came here with someone, maybe she’ll be jealous.
If Bill lets me borrow his jersey for the game, I can swing by his place later to return it.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, confidence, desire, embarrassment, excitement, happiness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:A bit of flirting can add a sense of fun to social interactions. This level of playfulness brings people closer and encourages everyone not to take things too seriously. When done skillfully, flirting can make others feel important. It is an attractive quality to most people.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters who are flirty by nature may not know when to stop flirting, which can cause jealousy to flare. Their actions can easily be misconstrued, making an interested party believe that the flirtatious character’s feelings run deeper than they actually do. Flirts can also take their behavior too far and run the risk of ruining their reputations.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Jessica Rabbit, the sultry singer fromWho Framed Roger Rabbit,is an iconic bombshell flirt. This animated character has curves and knows how to use them. Exuding confidence, she moves and dresses in a way that draws all male eyes to her assets.Other Examples from Film:Mae Mordabito (A League of their Own), Joan (Mr. Mom)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:callous, catty, cautious, devout, egotistical, innocent, overconfident, oversensitive, proper, sleazy, timid, vindictive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE FLIRTY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being interested in someone who seems immune to one’s flirting
PLOTLINE: Having a significant other who flirts with everyone
PLOTLINE: Being attracted to someone who is turned off by flirtation
PLOTLINE: Having to compete for someone’s attention because of other interested parties
