FLUSTERED
DEFINITION:Feeling overwrought and self-conscious due to confusion, uncertainty, or frustration

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
Breaking eye contact with someone
Blinking rapidly
A sharp intake of breath
A flush appearing in the face and neck
Using speech disfluencies (ums, ahs) to stall while trying to salvage a conversation
Stumbling over one’s sentences
Sputtering and struggling to find the right words
A nervous smile
Scraping a hand through one’s hair or tucking it behind an ear
The mouth opening and closing without speaking
Touching the face repeatedly
Making excuses that sound scattered or hastily put together
Lying to cover up perceived weaknesses or goof-ups
Clumsiness and jerky movements
Giving a quick shake of the head
Tapping or rubbing the forehead with one’s fingertips
Self-deprecation:Well, that was a stupid thing to say, wasn’t it?
Shielding or turning the body to the side rather than facing someone directly
Changing direction multiple times
An inability to stay still
Second-guessing oneself
Retreating from the conversation
Being unable to move on until a mistake is corrected (when giving a speech, teaching, etc.)
A strangled-sounding laugh
Throat-clearing
Making a joke to alleviate the situation or save face
Apologizing or talking rapidly
Pressing a fist against one’s thigh
Squeezing or pinching oneself (an arm, wrist, the skin between the thumb and forefinger, etc.) to try and regain focus
Turning to a physical task to busy one’s hands (clearing a table, straightening pillows, etc.)
Briefly cupping the back of the neck with one’s hand
Heat entering one’s tone
Deflecting (blaming another, arguing, changing the focus to something else, etc.)
Becoming emphatic to regain control:No, I’m fine. I’ve got it. I’ll have it to you Monday, really.
Glancing around for a rescue
Refusing help that is offered
Diverting attention:It’s too warm in here, don’t you think? Let’s open a window.
Allowing someone to enter one’s personal space if the cause is positive (such as a signal of romantic interest)
Stepping back to increase personal space if the cause is negative (being criticized in the presence of one’s peers, for example)

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
An increase in internal temperature
Heat in the face (blushing)
Tingling or tightness in the chest from not getting enough oxygen (holding one’s breath, not taking enough breaths, etc.)
A prickling along the back of the neck

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Feeling insecure or vulnerable
A loud, critical inner voice (for reacting this way)
Heightened awareness of being in the spotlight
Feeling as though time has stopped or slowed
A desire to flee that one must fight to overcome
Racing thoughts bent on regaining control of the situation

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Clamping the mouth shut to avoid exacerbating the situation
Uncontrolled blushing and visible sweating
Allowing someone else to take over
Making an exit regardless of the consequences

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
Feigning disinterest to minimize the importance of the current moment
Asking a question that will cause a reaction and put the spotlight elsewhere
Denying being flustered:No, you just caught me off guard, that’s all.
Manipulating the situation:You twointroduce yourselves while I get us drinks.

MAY ESCALATE TO:Frustration,Agitation,Embarrassment

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Annoyance,Uncertainty,Self-Loathing

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Addle, agitate, annoy, babble
blurt, blush, dart, dazzle
drop, fidget, flush, frustrate
gape, hamper, hesitate, hinder
joke, panic, rattle, squeeze
stare, struggle, stumble, torment
twitch, unbalance, undermine, upset
waffle, wobble

WRITER’S TIP:Sometimes a character will fight the emotion they are feeling. If this is the case, think about how their body language and dialogue may be at odds, and show that struggle.