FOCUSED
DEFINITION:having fixed concentration and attention

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:intense

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Intelligence
A studious nature
Having a deep interest in learning how things work
A desire to apply oneself; being goal-oriented and achievement-driven
A need for success or acclaim

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Making time for a subject of interest
Knowing what one wants
Being able to shut out distractions (music, people talking, the internet, etc.)
Intense concentration
Paying close attention and being alert for change
Leaning in or bending close to one’s subject of study
Single-mindedness
Losing track of time
Being prepared
Planning ahead
Having the stamina and endurance to see something through
Making a list of what needs to be done to stay on task
Having a clear head; being free of distracting emotional worries
Shutting out those who are negative or show a lack of understanding for one’s goals
Following a routine or training regimen
Having a strong work ethic when it comes to the subject of one’s focus
Understanding the scope of one’s mission or goal
Productivity
Feeling passion for one’s interest, goal, or career
Being a doer rather than a dreamer
Exhibiting strong willpower
Being able to organize one’s thoughts
Getting started right away rather than procrastinating
Caring about the outcome
Knowing what needs to be done
Taking the lead
Seeking answers to one’s questions
Persistence and determination
Prioritizing well
Appreciating structure and planning
Believing in oneself and one’s abilities
Wanting to do a good job
Getting lost in one’s work; not being aware of one’s surroundings
Showing devotion to a task or goal
Reading and researching to apply oneself more fully
Tackling one thing at a time rather than multi-tasking
Feeling frustration at those who are scatterbrained or chatty
Self-awareness (knowing one’s strengths and weaknesses)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Two years until the next Olympics. It won’t be easy, but I can do it.
My job is to keep my eye on the ball. Nothing else.
My legs want to give out, but I can push through it.
Allie doesn’t get it—I have to study. I want to go to Harvard, not some community college.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, curiosity, desire, determination, pride, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Focused characters are able to drive out negative self-talk along with external distractions and get down to work. Their determination and persistence allow them to stretch themselves to really discover what they are made of, excelling in ways that most only hope to do. They take themselves and their goals seriously and think big in terms of what challenges they wish to take on. Their desire to do well means they may go slowly, sacrificing efficiency for thoroughness.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While focused individuals are able to get down to business quickly and stay on task, their ability to block out everything but the mission sometimes means shutting out people. Focused characters may become so fixated on their inner world that they ignore or neglect loved ones and friends. Obsessions can develop, leading to an unbalanced lifestyle where all of one’s time goes into the goal, leaving little energy for anything else. Productive when focused, these characters may let other things slide in order to maintain a high productivity level in a specific area. They may lose track of time, miss appointments, and forget to attend family events.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Doc Holliday inTombstonehas a passion for gambling. This interest is all-consuming, sometimes causing him to stay up for days at a time in order to gamble. His extreme focus has turned him into a gifted player—one who can read opponents as well as cards—but it also puts his health at risk. Obsessed with the game and the drinking and smoking indulgences that go with it, Doc’s body slowly breaks down, unable to cope with the strain.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Evelyn Salt (Salt), Darby Shaw (The Pelican Brief), Hermione Granger (Harry Potterseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:easygoing, extroverted, inattentive, jealous, needy, sensitive, socially aware, temperamental, unstable, willful

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE FOCUSED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having dual goals or desires that split one’s focus
PLOTLINE: Experiencing repeated failures which threaten to weaken one’s resolve
PLOTLINE: Dealing with fallout from putting work before family
PLOTLINE: Being the target of a prankster
