FRIENDLY
DEFINITION:showing friendship; acting in a way that befits a friend

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:affable, amicable, congenial

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Living in a loving, supportive environment
Enjoying people and interaction
Confidence
Deriving pleasure from interaction and relationships
Being raised by parents who had a strong sense of community and caring
Having strong social skills
Believing in peace and goodwill
Craving acceptance; wanting to fit in

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Greeting people
Smiling
Being comfortable around others
Generosity
Asking questions to encourage conversation
Treating people fairly and with respect
Displaying trustworthiness and a willingness to trust others
Easily engaging in small talk, even with strangers
Displaying welcoming, open body posture
Having a positive attitude
Putting others at ease
Politeness
Talking about things in a positive light
Making time for people
Being thoughtful (bringing a gift for the hostess, etc.)
Being attentive in groups; making sure everyone is having a good time
Giving compliments
Cooperation
Showing support in good times and bad
Being open to new relationships
Using a warm tone
Speaking with energy and enthusiasm
Taking the time to find out a person’s interests
Being approachable and easy to talk to or confide in
Showing hospitality
Being a good neighbor
Following through on promises and commitments
Inviting others to meet one’s family or come into one’s home
Giving more than one takes
Trying new things, especially to support a friend (going rock climbing, etc.)
Reaching out to others when they need help
Respecting the independence of others
Not being judgmental
Showing appreciation
Not projecting one’s own baggage onto others

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Looks like a long wait. I’ll just talk to the people behind me to pass the time.
That girl is all alone at her table. I’ll eat lunch with her.
I can’t wait to meet the girls in my dance class.
Bill knows a ton about cars. I’ll ask his opinion on the best models.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:curiosity, gratitude, happiness, love, peacefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Friendly characters are kind, thoughtful, respectful, and open, naturally drawing people to them. One-on-one or in a crowd, they make those around them feel included and special. Characters who are friendly are highly sociable and genuinely care about the feelings of others, inspiring the people around them to become the very best versions of themselves.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Friendly characters are naturally helpful, making them a target for manipulative people, users, and predators. Some friends may also abuse these characters by counting on them too heavily, treating them as a sounding board for all of their problems. Not only can this cause moodiness and frustration, but it can result in the friendly character’s needs going unmet.

EXAMPLES FROM LITERATURE:Arthur Weasley (theHarry Potterfranchise) is very amicable and attentive. He asks questions to show his interest in others, is caring and kind, and his friendly nature puts him in good standing within most of the wizarding community. Trustworthy and helpful, Arthur reaches out to those in need and becomes something of a surrogate father for Harry.Other Examples from Film:Buddy (Elf), Giselle (Enchanted), Josh Baskin (Big)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:abrasive, controlling, cruel, inattentive, inflexible, manipulative, morbid, pushy

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE FRIENDLY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: A moral conflict that requires a choice between a friendship and doing what’s right
PLOTLINE: Being highly competitive
PLOTLINE: Having a friendship that grows toxic over time (due to inequality, jealousy, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Needing to set aside friendships in order to lead others, make decisions, or be diplomatic
