FUNNY
DEFINITION:comical; causing amusement or laughter

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:amusing, comical, entertaining, humorous, jovial

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a family where one was expected to entertain younger siblings
The desire to entertain, make people laugh, or be in the spotlight
Having a quirky and humorous outlook on life
Being exposed to comedians and entertainers
Growing up in an environment that was filled with laughter
Needing attention or affirmation

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Making witty comebacks and observations
Cracking jokes and making people laugh
Observing the strangeness of life in a comical way
Speaking in funny voices or accents
Using comical facial expressions
Having an excellent sense of timing
Thinking on the fly
Reveling in the unexpected
Being a strong storyteller
Embellishing stories to make them funnier
Being able to poke fun at oneself
Purposely acting like a klutz
Making light of a serious situation to defuse tension
Awkwardness that is comical and endearing
Engaging in clever wordplay
Offering wry commentary:Well, she’ll never win a gold medal for the balance beam.
Eccentricity
Noticing things that others miss
Using an object in a funny or inappropriate way
Drawing a crowd at social events
Using humor to bring people together and boost morale
Employing sarcasm that is funny rather than personal or hurtful
Making use of universally funny topics (potty humor, silly stereotypes, etc.)
Encouraging others to join in and add to the humor of the moment
Applying a truism in an unintended way:Make ourselves at home? Okay…off go the pants!
Making mistakes on purpose
Enjoying a good prank
Mischievousness
Confidence
Enjoying and pointing out irony
Pausing for effect
Spontaneity
Poking fun at personal calamities or situations
Knowing when to stop before something goes too far
Being highly social
Having good instincts about people (knowing what they might find funny or offensive, etc.)
Having one’s own style of humor; not copying someone else’s
Noting body language to judge the reaction to a joke

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Where’d that guy learn his table manners—from watching Survivor?
Buddy, a white suit? I’d love to see a car blast through a puddle right about now.
You know what would be funny? A clown with a phobia of clowns.
Everyone’s so serious. A good fart would lighten the mood.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, curiosity, happiness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Because everyone loves a good joke, characters with a strong sense of humor usually have no shortage of friends. When life gets serious or someone wants to let off steam, it’s easy to kick back and have a good time with someone funny. Humor is generally appreciated, so amusing characters can sometimes joke themselves out of a serious situation and escape unwanted consequences.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Some characters may not know when to stop being funny; this can create the perception that they’re unable to take anything seriously. Funny characters who go too far can cause anger or embarrassment for others, creating rifts in relationships. In addition, friends and potential lovers may have trouble getting close to these characters as they wonder if the humor is simply a mask that hides the funny character’s true self.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Jerry Seinfeld began his career as a stand-up comedian, making the late night TV circuit and impressing the likes of Johnny Carson and David Letterman with his unique brand of funny. He then channeled his humor into the creation and writing ofSeinfeld, a sitcom that went on to become a commercial success and pop culture sensation. Popular Seinfeldisms such asthe master of your domain,yadda-yadda-yadda,regifting,Festivus, andspongeworthyare still quoted to this day.Other Examples from Pop Culture:Richard Pryor, Ellen DeGeneres, Lucille Ball, Eddie Murphy, Chris Rock

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:defensive, focused, haughty, humorless, insecure, predictable, proper, pushy, studious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE FUNNY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working beneath a serious person (a boss who evaluates employees for promotion, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Facing a personal tragedy or seeing others experience one
PLOTLINE: Being paired with another funny character who gets bigger laughs
PLOTLINE: Living in a culture where one’s humor is considered inappropriate, offensive, or not funny
PLOTLINE: Belonging to a family where one’s actions are scrutinized (a political or royal family, etc.)
