GENEROUS
DEFINITION:liberal in giving

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:altruistic, bighearted, charitable, giving, philanthropic

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of gratitude
Desiring to share, lift up, and help others
Wanting to pay back or pay forward
Growing up in a giving family or community
Having a strong sense of morality
Experiencing the generosity of others in a way that changed one’s life for the better

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Sharing whenever doing so might help
Offering gifts with no conditions
Kindness
Thoughtfulness
Deriving pleasure at lifting someone’s spirits
Donating one’s time, energy, and money to charitable causes
Giving time to help organize events or socials
Being trustworthy and assuming the trustworthiness of others
Taking on extra duties or responsibilities to give someone else a break
Offering to use one’s connections or influence to help someone
Giving compliments
Making time for people
Hoping others will be inspired to act generously if one does so first
Seeing the needs of others and doing something about it
Opening one’s home to others
Being non-materialistic
Giving because one can
Humility; playing down one’s generosity
Being actively concerned about the welfare of others
Spreading happiness and positivity
Treating others like family
Thinking about how one can better help or aid a person or cause
Being proactive
Giving back to one’s community and workplace
Gaining energy from giving
Taking the lead role in a cause that is dear to one’s heart
Living humbly
Inspiring others
Being dedicated to others
Being passionate about one’s giving
Treating people with equality
Showing a genuine interest in others
Being a good listener
Empathy
Friendliness
Appreciating what one has
Learning more about a cause through involvement (working in a soup kitchen, etc.)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
That homeless man always wears the same threadbare coat. Maybe one of mine would fit.
Mary’s had a hard pregnancy. I think I’ll make up some casseroles for her freezer.
Someone has to organize the Christmas party; since I’m home this year, I can help.
I’ll tuck a spare twenty in Lucas’ jacket before he leaves. It will be a nice surprise.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, gratitude, love, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Generous characters are fulfilled by bringing comfort, satisfaction, and happiness to others. Content with what they have, they hold a high appreciation for their circumstances and the important people in their lives. They often make good listeners and are very observant. If they see a need, they step forward to fill it to the best of their ability, rather than wait for someone else to do so. These characters inspire kindness and philanthropy in others through their unselfish acts. They see giving as simply part of being a decent human being.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Generous characters view the world through a positive filter, seeing the best in people. This naïveté regarding the human condition can leave them open to being taken advantage of by those without scruples. These characters find it difficult to say no, and often overcommit rather than risk disappointing those depending on them. They can also be generous to a fault, giving so sacrificially that their own welfare suffers.

EXAMPLE FROM POP CULTURE:Santa Claus is possibly the most iconic example of generosity. According to the well-loved story, Santa and his elves work the year through to make presents for the good children of the world until Christmas Eve, when they deliver them house-to-house via magical reindeer. Cheerful, good-natured, and hardworking, Santa is always ready with a kind word of praise.Other Examples from Film:Oskar Schindler (Schindler’s List), George and Mary Bailey (It’s a Wonderful Life)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:grumpy, irresponsible, manipulative, stingy, stubborn, temperamental, timid

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE GENEROUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Wanting to give something to a person with extreme pride
PLOTLINE: Being too ill or overburdened to continue with one’s charity projects
PLOTLINE: Having to say no to a worthy cause
PLOTLINE: Being confronted by family members who don’t feel like they’re a priority
