GENTLE
DEFINITION:not harsh, brusque, or violent

CATEGORIES:interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:benign, docile, mild

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being raised by loving caregivers
Being naturally sensitive to the feelings of others
Being protected or shielded from the world as a child
Valuing all life

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Graciousness
Kindness
Being soft-spoken
Patience
Exhibiting good manners
Being considerate and loving
Showing thoughtfulness for others
Comforting those in need
Modesty
Being even-keeled
Showing unconditional love
Keeping to oneself
Preferring quieter environments
Having a non-threatening demeanor
Speaking thoughtfully
Rarely raising one’s voice
Being respectful of the privacy of others
Offering slow smiles
Having a positive attitude
Speaking in a calm, comforting tone
Using careful movements and easy touches (patting an arm to show closeness, etc.)
Taking moments for quiet reflection
Enjoying being alone with one’s thoughts
Avoiding crowds and noise
Humming or singing softly during times of contentment
Avoiding high drama and stressful situations
Forging close friendships with a few people rather than having many friends
Trustworthiness
Being able to calm others and enable them to let down their guard
Displaying concern for people, animals, or nature
Optimism
Being intuitive and observant
Not being competitive
Indulging in daydreams
Showing an appreciation of beauty and art
Reserving one’s opinion until it is requested
Being noncombative; refusing to argue

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Hank is so stressed out. Maybe a walk after dinner will help him relax.
I love it when I make Jill smile. She tries to hide it, but losing her job has taken a toll.
If I stay calm, maybe everyone will stop shouting at each other.
That poor cat’s skin and bones. I’ll coax her out with a can of tuna and take her home.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:curiosity, desire, gratitude, happiness, hopefulness, nostalgia

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Gentle characters are soft-spoken, reflective, and observant. They are attuned to the emotions of others and can often help defuse tense situations. Thoughtful and respectful, they make great friends and can forge loving relationships. Their gentle nature often compels others to protect them and pay greater heed to their emotional needs.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Gentle characters can have quieter personalities, which, from a literary standpoint, can put them in danger of fading on the page. They may have difficulty voicing their own desires and needs or pursuing them to the point of feeling fulfilled. If they live in a loud, busy environment that is not suited to their personality, they may become overly dependent on others. This can make characters like these appear weak to readers.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:When becoming stranded on a hostile planet, most aliens would go on the defensive. Instead, gentle E.T. (E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial) befriends a trio of siblings. He faces many indignities, such as having to live in Elliot’s closet, being disguised with flowery frocks and cosmetics by Gertie, and having to flee faceless government officials. But he consistently responds with kindness and empathy, shattering countless alien stereotypes and creating a truly unforgettable character.Other Examples from Literature:Black Beauty (Black Beauty), John Coffey (The Green Mile)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cruel, flaky, nervous, possessive, temperamental, volatile, repressed

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE GENTLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being faced with turmoil within the community (lawlessness, riots, impending war, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having others in danger and being forced to fight to save them
PLOTLINE: Dealing with people who have no respect for those with quiet dispositions
PLOTLINE: Having to play peacemaker between feuding family members
PLOTLINE: Being betrayed by a loved one
