HAPPY
DEFINITION:upbeat and content

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:cheerful, content, jolly, lighthearted, merry, upbeat

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a loving home environment
Being satisfied in one’s job
Having balanced and fulfilling relationships
Being safe and secure
Having strong purpose
Feeling at peace with who one is

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Staying connected with family and friends
Kindness and thoughtfulness
Showing gratitude for what one has
Being optimistic about the future; focusing on the positive
Feeling satisfied at doing good and helping others
Coping with life’s ups and downs in a healthy way
Pursuing mental and physical health
Contentment
Thinking about the bigger picture and how one fits into it
Looking at the bright side when something bad happens
Minimal stressing and worrying
Putting things into perspective
Generosity and kindness
Having a good sense of humor
Enjoying other people and the unique talents and ideas that they offer
Working well with others
Humming or singing
Friendliness and politeness
Enjoying learning new things
Forgiving others for wrongs
Deriving pleasure from all that life brings
Being willing to commit to the people and causes that one cares about
Setting goals that will continue or increase one’s satisfaction and happiness
Feeling at peace with one’s world
Taking control of one’s life
Not comparing oneself to others
Making time for hobbies and engaging in creativity
Being considerate of others
Laughing and smiling
Honesty and truthfulness
Being trustworthy
Loving others unconditionally
Being persistent; pursuing the things one loves to do
Self-confidence
Not taking life or people for granted
Challenging oneself
Being proactive
Noticing and appreciating beauty
Daydreaming about the future

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What a sunrise! After I finish my coffee I’ll treat Grandma to a pancake breakfast.
If I work hard all summer, I can pay for snowboarding lessons this winter.
What a great day. I can’t believe how beautiful it is outside.
I did it! I didn’t drink pop for a whole month. I bet I could do it for another month.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, confidence, eagerness, gratitude, happiness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Happy characters are content and fulfilled. Satisfied with their life’s direction, they take a straightforward approach to fixing the things that bother them so they can keep charging ahead. When wronged, happy people are able to forgive. They love unconditionally; this, paired with the contagious nature of happiness, makes them desirable as friends.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Happy characters will sometimes steer clear of inconveniences that would dispel their good mood. This can frustrate others, who may feel that these characters aren’t taking the situation seriously or being a team player. If a friend who is down wants to be left alone, being overly cheery and determined to bring him “up” may be the last thing he wants or needs. When the happy character’s attempts to improve his mood is rebuffed, it can lead to hurt feelings and a damaged friendship.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:The popular character Mr. Bean from theMr. Beanfranchise is always upbeat and optimistic, no matter how simple the situation or what calamities befall him. He makes the best of any scenario, smiles often, and gains joy via problem solving and innovation as he deals with humorous mishaps.Other Examples from TV and Pop Culture:Andy Taylor (The Andy Griffith Show), Santa Claus

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:grumpy, haughty, needy, oversensitive, resentful, superstitious, ungrateful

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE HAPPY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with grief or betrayal
PLOTLINE: Having to decide if a stagnating relationship should be salvaged or cut loose
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation that causes doubt about one’s ability to succeed
PLOTLINE: Seeing others in pain or unhappy
PLOTLINE: Having one’s fortune come with a price (being promoted because a co-worker was let go)
