HONORABLE
DEFINITION:characterized by noble principles; displaying integrity

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:ethical, principled, reputable, respectable, upright

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of empathy
Being raised in an environment where ethics and honor were valued
Having role models that put duty and country first

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Loyalty
Speaking the truth when asked
Standing up for one’s beliefs even when it’s unpopular to do so
Giving without expecting anything in return
Treating people (even opponents) with respect and fairness
Taking the high road
Forgiving people
Giving someone the benefit of the doubt
Transparency; acting without manipulation
Honesty
Graciousness
Thanking an opponent after a game; wishing them well
Being up-front about what one wants or needs
Requesting help when it’s needed
Helping others when one is able to do so
Humility
Adhering to a code of ethics
Seeking out truth and knowledge
Fact-checking
Having good manners
Keeping one’s ego in check
Not taking advantage of other people or unlawful opportunities
Maintaining control of one’s emotions
Accepting responsibility
Making changes to bring about positive improvement
Having a strong sense of right and wrong
Living by example
Having strong self-esteem
Treating others as equals
Protecting those who need it
Respecting and upholding the law
Keeping one’s promises
Making sacrifices so others are safe
Having a strong sense of loyalty to one’s community or country
Never asking others to do what one is not willing to do first

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’ve been honest from the get go. He should have taken me at my word.
I’m no hero; I just did the right thing, that’s all.
Amy’s new, but I’ll trust her on this. I would want the same if our roles were reversed.
I should take Mark home before his drinking gets out of hand.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, gratitude, hopefulness, pride, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Honorable characters have an inner strength and integrity that makes them highly trusted and respected. They do what they believe to be right, no matter what the cost to themselves. Someone who acts with honor will put personal ego aside and behave with complete transparency, showing his strength of character.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because honorable characters try to see the best in people, they can be targets for those who are unprincipled. This may lead to them being duped or taken advantage of. Some honorable characters may blindly trust in organizations and people and fail to see that these individuals aren’t worthy of such loyalty. If they don’t continually evaluate the groups and individuals they’re aligned with, their actions can actually do harm instead of good.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Jean Valjean, the freed slave fromLes Misérables, tries to do the right thing and view everyone as equal. His respect extends to people from all walks of life as he empathizes with their struggles for survival and freedom. He treats people with dignity and embodies forgiveness—even for Javert, the ruthless policemen who hounds him over the decades despite the honorable life Jean has lived since his original transgression.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Marko Ramius (The Hunt for Red October), Aragorn (The Fellowship of The Ring), Cameron Poe (Con Air)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, hypocritical, impatient, loyal, sleazy, unethical

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE HONORABLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Choosing between family and the law
PLOTLINE: Having one’s trust betrayed
PLOTLINE: Desiring to seek retribution after a preventable loss (the death of a child to drunk driving, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Doing the right thing when it conflicts with one’s desire
