HOSPITABLE
DEFINITION:welcoming to others; showing generosity to guests

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:neighborly

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a large family that gathers often to socialize
Living in a close-knit community where everyone looks out for one another
Having parents or caregivers who opened their home to whoever was in need
Being raised as a socialite where “playing the host” was a frequent role
Being a nurturer
Having a strong sense of community

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Opening up one’s home to others
Hosting events to bring people together
Greeting people with warmth and enthusiasm
Generosity
Being optimistic and open-minded
Offering comforts to guests (food, drink, a bathroom to freshen up in, etc.)
Including others
Striking up conversations to make others feel important and welcome
Being non-judgmental
Showing respect for one’s guests
Being able to put oneself in someone else’s place
Offering protection to others
Treating newcomers like family
Being genuine
Wanting people to feel comfortable
Willingly serving others
Reaching out to neighbors who might be in need
Seeking out ways to help others
Setting aside one’s schedule to attend to others
Being a good listener
Showing an active interest in other people’s lives; asking questions
Sharing silly stories about oneself to make others feel at ease
Freely offering one’s trust
Making travel recommendations (the best restaurants, local sites to see, etc.)
Being thoughtful in small ways (baking muffins for someone’s breakfast, etc.)
Seeing the best in other people
Having a friendly manner
Enjoying the exchange of experiences, ideas, and perspectives
Being helpful and kind
Following through on promises
Showing others that it is safe to be vulnerable
Treating others the same way one would like to be treated
Giving someone the benefit of the doubt
Acting as a tour guide for someone who is unfamiliar with the area
Making people feel secure and safe
Sharing one’s possessions and resources with others
Enjoying fellowship with others
Caring more about people than one’s possessions

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
There’s a couch in the basement. I’ll ask Mark if his friend would like to stay here.
I loved hearing about Nepal last night. Jess has been to some amazing places!
Poor Sam, losing his home. We should clean up Carl’s old room and offer it to him.
I’m going to invite the new neighbors over for dessert.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, curiosity, excitement, gratitude, happiness, love, pride, satisfaction, sympathy

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Hospitable characters are loving and open and have a strong sense of community. Their desire to connect with people in a meaningful way makes others feel valued, safe, and welcome. Hospitable characters promote trust and fellowship through their generosity, kindness, and self-sacrifice.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Hospitable characters can be so open and willing to serve others that too much of their time and energy is spent satisfying the needs of friends, acquaintances, and strangers, leaving not enough one-on-one time with family. Their generosity can also put them at the mercy of selfish or entitled guests who would take as much as they can get without giving in return. And while hospitable characters gain real satisfaction from making others feel welcome, frustration and disillusionment can occur when their kindnesses aren’t reciprocated.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Vianne Rocher (Chocolat) greets with a smile all the guests who frequent her chocolate shop, offering them free samples of this or that and trying to guess what their favorite confection might be. An outcast herself, she recognizes the sting of rejection and is determined that everyone she meets will feel welcomed and accepted.Other Examples from Literature:Bilbo Baggins (The Hobbit), Mr. And Mrs. Beaver (The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe), the Abegnation faction (Divergentseries), Bishop Myriel of Digne (Les Misérables)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT: antisocial, entitled, paranoid, rude, suspicious, unfriendly, ungrateful, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE HOSPITABLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Playing host to people who do not trust one another
PLOTLINE: Trying to be hospitable while grieving for the loss of a loved one
PLOTLINE: Being asked to entertain or help someone who has hurt a family member in the past
PLOTLINE: Wanting to help and care for others but being incapacitated (from an illness, etc.)
