HUMBLE
DEFINITION:not haughty, arrogant, or superior

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:demure, meek, modest, unpretentious

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being naturally introverted
Growing up in the shadow of talented parents or siblings
Living in an environment where one shouldn’t call attention to oneself
Having an honest desire to see others receive recognition and praise
Coming from a religious background that teaches honoring others rather than oneself
Having low self-esteem or confidence
Being shy

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Avoiding the spotlight
Taking background roles
Downplaying one’s skills and abilities
Talking up the accomplishments of others
Feeling satisfaction at being part of a team
Expressing discomfort when complimented
Deferring to others when disagreements or stalemates arise
Speaking in a quiet voice
Using unassuming movements that don’t draw the eye
Engaging in hobbies and activities that don’t call attention to oneself
Not bragging about one’s successes
Having a strong work ethic
Responding to internal rather than external motivators
Doing one’s work without grumbling or complaint
Generosity
Using words that are uplifting and encouraging
Being supportive
Giving compliments
Underestimating oneself
Playing it safe; not taking risks
Doing the jobs that no one else wants to do
Not expressing one’s opinions until asked to do so
Listening first, then speaking
Minimizing one’s role in success to avoid attention
Keeping secrets about one’s successes or achievements
Becoming embarrassed when others bring up one’s talents or abilities
Turning praise around to the giver; diverting attention

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
She’s worked so hard on this project. I hope she gets the proper credit.
Please don’t call on me… Please don’t call on me…
I’m so proud to be part of this team.
I wish they wouldn’t go on about my involvement; it was a group effort.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, happiness, insecurity, nervousness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Humble characters defer to others, allowing them to take the credit. They’re happy to be involved in a process that leads to something good and are satisfied to play a part without needing to share in the acclaim. These characters often prefer supportive roles, seeing themselves as cogs in the machine, and do not seek to elevate themselves above others. Because generosity goes hand in hand with humility, these characters are usually highly thought of by their peers. Humble characters often deflect when addressed directly, singing the praises of those around them as the “real heroes.” This kindness is appreciated by others and creates a strong reciprocal feeling of loyalty and friendship.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:It can be very difficult to thank or give a boon of appreciation to those who are overly humble since they see themselves as unworthy of such attention. Similarly, their unwillingness to take more credit than is due can create unnecessary awkwardness. Trying to repay a favor or do a good turn for a character who is unable to accept such kindness can lead to frustration. It’s also possible that, due to their desire to remain in a supporting role, humble characters may fail to live up to their full potential.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:George Bailey (It’s a Wonderful Life) spends his life serving others and supporting his successful friends and family members. Instead of recognizing the powerful role he plays in the lives of the people around him, he sees himself as a simple family man and owner of a “cheap, penny-ante building and loan.” Despite having repeatedly sacrificed for the people of Bedford Falls, he is genuinely shocked at the end of the story by their tangible outpouring of gratitude for all that he has done.Other Examples from Literature:Melanie Wilkes (Gone with the Wind), Ma Ingalls (Little House on the Prairieseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, charming, defensive, extravagant, flamboyant, flashy, gossipy, proud, pushy

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE HUMBLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being forced into a leadership position
PLOTLINE: Having to step out of the shadows in order to right a wrong
PLOTLINE: Being paired with a flamboyant or quirky character who’s always drawing attention
PLOTLINE: Experiencing success in a very public fashion that makes one uncomfortable
PLOTLINE: Being part of a team whose values or work ethic conflict with one’s own
