IMAGINATIVE
DEFINITION:having an active imagination; forming clear mental images of things that have not been previously considered

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:inspired, inventive

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Wanting to escape one’s current situation
Genetics
Having a highly active mind
Being naturally curious
Being generally dissatisfied with the status quo; knowing that things can always be better

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Verbalizing one’s ideas with enthusiasm and energy
Looking at what’s common or plain and seeing something special
Solving problems creatively
Being artistic
Daydreaming
Being able to visualize something without props or plans
Sketching, journaling, or making notes about one’s ideas
Having no shortage of ideas
Being creative
Being intrigued by fantasy or that which is not yet a reality (advances in science, etc.)
Enjoying mysteries and the unknown
Being fascinated by inventiveness and the innovations of others
Enjoying movies and/or reading fiction
Thinking about theWhat if?
Optimism and a positive outlook
Believing in things that aren’t real
Being driven to turn an idea into a reality
Staring off at nothing while thinking
Being drawn to color and movement
Believing that anything is possible
Experiencing more epiphanies than most people
Eccentricity
Being fun-loving and playful; acting silly in order to explore ideas
Curiosity
Resourcefulness
Dreaming vividly
Having a strong awareness of the world and oneself; seeing what others miss
Being able to entertain oneself (and often others, as well)
Finding inspiration from many sources
Fearlessness
Rarely suffering from boredom
Being unworried about what others think
Indulging in role-playing games

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What if there really was something in the closet? What if it’s watching me right now?
When you think about it, how could aliens not be real?
I have to get this story idea down on paper—it’s brilliant!
This zoo fundraiser is dull. Why can’t the monkeys break out and swarm the dining hall?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, confidence, curiosity, eagerness, excitement

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Imaginative characters are always looking for a way to entertain themselves. Their thoughts are vivid, as clear to these characters as if they were watching a movie, and they often feel compelled to share their ideas with others. This can make them the life of the party and create spontaneous fun with friends. For them, there is no idea too big or too preposterous. Once inspired, they become compelled to turn their dreams into realities. This leads to incredible innovation.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:An imaginative character who lets his imagination run amok can become his own worst enemy. Living too fully among one’s ideas and not enough in the real world can lead to social anxiety disorders, compulsive behavior, and a blurred line between what’s real and what’s not. Those who have a strong imagination may appear eccentric to others, becoming isolated. And while they’re responsible for incredible innovations, not all new ideas are positive. Weapons of mass destruction, chemical warfare, and torture techniques like water boarding are all examples of innovation that brought about dark results.

EXAMPLE FROM HISTORY:Walt Disney was a man with great vision. Never satisfied with the status quo, he was always thinking up bigger ideas. Comics, animation, cartoon shorts, full-length feature films, amusement parks—his imagination was boundless. He took many risks pursuing his endeavors, many of which ended in failure. But he always kept going, thinking outside of the existing box to come up with new ideas that, once considered impossible, have become commonplace in today’s culture.Other Examples from Film and History:J.M. Barrie (Finding Neverland), Stephen Hawking, Albert Einstein, Benjamin Franklin

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:analytical, fussy, inhibited, proper, superstitious, uncommunicative

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE IMAGINATIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having one’s idea stolen by someone else
PLOTLINE: Coming up with a new idea at the same time that someone else puts it forth
PLOTLINE: Living so much in one’s imagination that the line between fantasy and reality blurs
PLOTLINE: Envisioning something original and amazing but not being able to make it a reality
PLOTLINE: Not being believed due to one’s imaginative nature
