INDEPENDENT
DEFINITION:thinking and acting for oneself; resisting influence

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:autonomous, self-reliant, self-sufficient

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having trust issues
Needing to be in control
Shyness
Being introverted
Having a rebellious streak
Experiencing oppression in the past
Believing in oneself and one’s abilities
A history of personal success and capability
Desiring to be beholden to no one

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Self-reliance
Accepting others
Exhibiting inner emotional strength
Trustworthiness
Striving for what one wants; not settling
Having a strong work ethic
Being able to do things on one’s own
Enjoying solitude and being alone
Seeking out information and then making up one’s mind
Trusting one’s intuition
Being centered; knowing who one is and what one’s role is in the world
Being goal oriented
Not being affected by peer pressure
Choosing not to meddle in other people’s lives
Being passionate about an activity or a cause
Not wasting time
Cutting out negative influences (toxic friends, jobs that are draining, etc.)
Not getting upset easily
Patience
Recognizing when something isn’t working and making changes to correct it
Protecting one’s privacy and territory
Knowing what is best for oneself
Respecting the rights of others
Moving on from one’s past; letting go of emotional baggage
Being financially responsible
Finding it difficult to ask for help
Being highly disciplined
Taking pride in one’s achievements
Being competitive with oneself
Having a good work-life balance; not being overcommitted or stressed out
Placing a high value on personal freedom
Having a clear vision
Taking the initiative
Striving to put doubters in their place through proving them wrong
Avoiding debt; being financially responsible

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
It took ten months, but this canoe is ready. I can’t wait to take it out on the lake.
I wish my parents would stop trying to rule my life. I know what’s best for me.
Buying a house will strain my finances, but renting out the top floor will help pay the bills.
I know Vic’s got more money than me, but I can afford to pay for my own dinner.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, defensiveness, happiness, loneliness, relief, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Independent characters see themselves clearly. They know what they can do and are comfortable taking action when others might be cowed. Past successes prove their capability, so they’re able to work alone and often prefer to do so. These characters are sure of themselves and aren’t overly concerned about the perceptions of others. As a result, they’re able to focus on their goals and the job at hand. Forward-thinkers, they’re able to move past the status quo to embrace ideals that are ahead of their time.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because they are so often alone, independent characters may have difficulty working with or relating to others. Their lack of concern with what people think may create a perception about them of aloofness, smugness, or superiority. Their self-reliance may give loved ones the idea that they aren’t needed or even much wanted and may widen the gap between these characters and the people in their lives.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Thanks to his experiences as a Green Beret in Vietnam, John Rambo (First Blood) knows how to fend for himself. His skills come in handy when he returns from the war to a hostile culture where he has difficulty relating to others or getting a decent job. When things get tough, he withdraws from society, traveling from place to place and taking care of himself rather than relying on others.Other Examples from Literature:Laura Ingalls (theLittle Housebooks), Erin Brockovich (Erin Brockovich)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, cowardly, judgmental, needy, nervous, self-destructive, spoiled, timid

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE INDEPENDENT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having dependent family members (a sibling needing financial support, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having a mental disorder that makes one dependent on others
PLOTLINE: Suffering a blow to one’s finances (being robbed, a bad investment, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having a friend who needs emotional support over a long period of time
PLOTLINE: Incurring a debilitating injury that requires help from others (having to learn to walk again, etc.)
