INDUSTRIOUS
DEFINITION:working with devotion and determination

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:diligent, hardworking, tireless

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a “type A” personality
Being raised by parents who showed favor when one pushed hard and succeeded
The desire for fulfillment; being goal driven
Having a strong passion or sense of purpose
Having a strong motivation to succeed
Craving power, status, or influence

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Rising early and working late
Being organized, punctual and efficient
Researching and obtaining information
Spending off-hours thinking about work
Having high standards
Talking often about one’s passions
Reaching targets ahead of schedule
Competitiveness with oneself or with others
Working well with others when required to
Pursuing ideas that will improve the end result
Practicing more if needed
Shuffling appointments to accommodate one’s work
Streamlining one’s processes to be more efficient
Experiencing satisfaction from even small wins
Perseverance
Directness; not beating around the bush
Socializing with people from work to discuss work
Adhering to routines
Not wasting time or procrastinating
Anticipating what’s needed
Double-checking; worrying over small mistakes
Dependability and consistency
Reflecting on an event to evaluate how it went
Not complaining about the labor involved in completing a project
Skipping meals when one is busy
Needing to be constantly active and engaged in tasks
Being prepared (even over-prepared) for events or meetings
Suffering from muscle strain and sore muscles (if tasks are physical)
Feeling mentally and physically wrung out at the end of the day
Sleeping less than other people
Rewarding oneself (having a beer after work, watching the game, etc.)
Protecting one’s personal time
Taking work calls at home after hours
Being restless between projects
Studying the techniques of others who have succeeded at the same thing
Blowing off steam to balance out tense, long hours of work
Curbing bad habits or behaviors to be better at one’s job (staying out late, etc.)
Using self-talk to encourage oneself to work harder

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
If I train hard all summer, I’ll be ready for the dance competition this fall.
By adding five laps to every swim session, I’ll drop those extra pounds in no time.
It’s 8:00 am and Dawn’s still sleeping? Time to wake up, Sleeping Beauty!
Rick is Bob’s favorite because he’s so dedicated. I need to put in more hours, too.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, desire, determination, excitement, impatience, overwhelmed, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Industrious characters are dependable and hardworking, pouring all their energy into a task or goal. When a job needs to be done, they step up and pull their weight. They make good use of their time and are good role models. Industrious characters generally see success and feel strong satisfaction at putting their best effort into all they do. They have the drive to complete what they’ve started and often end up being involved in innovation and change.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Industrious characters may sometimes become so caught up in their work that it damages their health and relationships. Long work hours and stress will disrupt sleep patterns and weaken their immune systems. Family and friends may feel resentment when an industrious character gives all of his time and energy to a job or project, leaving nothing for them. The pursuit of success, power, or prestige can become all-consuming, leading to a very unbalanced and exhausting lifestyle.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Rudy Ruettiger (Rudy) is a young man who dreams of playing football at the University of Notre Dame. Although he lacks the grades, the finances, and the physique of a football player, he refuses to give up. He works feverishly to earn income and overcome his dyslexia while attending a neighboring college, raising his grades enough to transfer to Notre Dame. Rudy volunteers to work for free as a groundskeeper to get closer to the team he loves and finally gains a spot on the practice squad. Due to his hard work, drive, and incredible heart, he’s allowed to dress as one of the team for the final home game.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Ruby Thewes (Cold Mountain), Vince Papale (Invincible)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:easygoing, flaky, lazy, needy, playful, rebellious, rowdy

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE INDUSTRIOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a family crisis that demands one’s time and attention
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s job, and with it, one’s sense of identity
PLOTLINE: Being unable to achieve conflicting goals; having to fail at one to succeed at the other
PLOTLINE: Being given a task one cannot complete despite a strong work ethic (due to lack of skill, etc.)
PLOTLINE: 
