INTELLIGENT
DEFINITION:having a high mental capacity; cerebral

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:brainy, bright, smart

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Genetics
Having access to education and opportunities
Living in a nurturing environment during formative years
Being highly motivated to learn

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Adhering to logic and reasoning
Thinking quickly
Having strong problem-solving skills
Impatience
Having good recall
Being able to focus intently
Asking pointed and thoughtful questions
Having an aptitude for languages
Curiosity
Seeking constant stimulation
Having deep knowledge of a hobby or interest
Taking pride in one’s achievements
Being goal driven
Enjoying mysteries or puzzles
Being innovative
Having an aptitude for a specific subject (math, geology, programming, etc.)
Being able to absorb or process information well
Having an affinity for technology
Enjoying recreational activities that contain an educational component
Being well-spoken with a strong vocabulary
Believing in facts over faith or intuition
Drawing apt conclusions from an analysis of facts
Being respected by others
Showing respect for other intelligent people
Setting aside personal feelings so a task can be accomplished
Being objective
Avoiding slang and shortcuts
Having original ideas
Asking for precise instructions or directions
Catching onto a punch line before it’s revealed (nodding beforehand, etc.)
Thinking efficiently
Having a noticeable flaw due to one’s obvious intelligence in other areas
Puzzling out calculations in one’s head (determining taxes, etc.)
Reflecting on ideas that are complex or unusual
Becoming lost in thought
Losing track of a conversation when one’s mind is active

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
By splitting the bill twelve ways, we’ll each owe twenty-two dollars, including tax.
If I buy Professor Bell a coffee, I can pick his brain about quantum mechanics.
There are three grammatical errors in this bulletin. Why don’t people proofread?
I can’t wait to tell Jeremiah I’ve come up with a solution for his problem!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, contempt, frustration, happiness, pride, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Highly intelligent characters have a lot of knowledge and can therefore offer information when it’s needed. Most are also good problem solvers, which is always helpful in a pinch. Really smart characters are good at research and are able to get to the root of things. They aren’t often led astray by slanted or biased viewpoints. Intelligence is a highly respected trait, so these characters will often be admired and emulated despite their negative characteristics.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because intelligent characters are able to think quickly, they often become frustrated with or contemptuous of those who can’t keep up. Smart characters know they’re smart; for those who just want to fit in, this can lead to negative behaviors such as hiding their intelligence, underachieving, and settling for mediocrity. Intelligent characters are often exceptional in some way; this can cause underdevelopment in other areas, creating an imbalance.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Will Hunting (Good Will Hunting) lives life as a simple janitor, but in reality, he’s a genius. Not only does he have a photographic memory, but his mind is also capable of solving mathematical queries that few in the world can begin to understand. With a brain like his, the sky should be the limit, but wounds formed by his abusive past keep him from realizing his potential. Will is a great example of how a deliberate combination of positive attributes and flaws can result in a truly memorable character.Other Examples from Film and Literature:John Nash (A Beautiful Mind), the rats of NIMH (Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH), Ender Wiggins (Ender’s Game)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:disorganized, foolish, idealistic, immature, irresponsible, lazy, prejudiced

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE INTELLIGENT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being placed in a group where one’s teammates take advantage of one’s intelligence
PLOTLINE: Having parents with excessively high standards and expectations
PLOTLINE: Being treated as a simpleton because of misconceptions or prejudice
PLOTLINE: Working in an environment where luck and chance are big factors
PLOTLINE: Lacking other skills (such as street smarts) that are necessary to achieving one’s goal
