INTROVERTED
DEFINITION:being inclined to explore one’s inner mental landscape more so than the outer world

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:introspective, reserved

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Genetics (an oversensitivity to dopamine)
Having a strong sense of self

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Only speaking when one has something important to say; avoiding small talk
Needing time alone to recharge after being around others
Preferring to socialize one-on-one rather than in groups
Being highly self-sufficient
Avoiding loud, noisy, or chaotic events (rock concerts, big parties, etc.)
Respecting people’s boundaries and privacy
Forgetting to check a phone or email for messages
Looking forward to being alone and having time to do nothing
Being a deep thinker
Speaking slowly and thoughtfully
Becoming more uncomfortable than is normal when one’s personal space is invaded
Hiding from people (not answering the phone or door, etc.)
Clock-watching to know when it’s finally okay to duck out of an event
Staying in one place at a party rather than working the room
Spending one’s lunch hour alone rather than joining co-workers
Becoming uncomfortable when one is singled out
Having strong focus and attention
Letting others make the first move rather than approaching them first
Patience
Thoughtfulness
Being a good observer and listener (when the conversation is meaningful)
Thinking before reacting
Enjoying peace and quiet
Being in touch with one’s emotions yet not feeling pressured to express or share them
Avoiding dangerous or risky activities
Making excuses to not attend group events or large family gatherings
Being non-competitive with others
Preferring to work alone rather than with others
Forming a small number of deep relationships rather than many casual ones
Choosing friends carefully
Being an avid reader
Choosing interests and sports that are solitary (hiking, knitting, bird-watching, etc.)
Being creative in some way
Becoming irritable when one is overstimulated
Practicality
Appreciating structure, organization, and time limits
Choosing clothing that is uniform rather than unique or colorful
Listening to music at a low volume rather than a high volume

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’ll stay an hour, but no more. That should make Marcy happy.
I can’t listen to any more office chatter. Tomorrow, I’m eating lunch in the park.
It’s so noisy here. Maybe I can convince Lucas to try a different restaurant.
If I offer to work next weekend, I’ll have an excuse to miss the family reunion.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anxiety, conflicted, curiosity, defensiveness, nostalgia, peacefulness, relief

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Introverted characters are good listeners and make thoughtful friends who connect on a deeper level. They think before speaking and acting, which keeps them from making silly mistakes due to rushing or high emotion. Characters with this attribute obtain their energy from peace and quiet and enjoy contemplation and reflection. They are able to keep their cool and maintain perspective in situations where extroverts become impatient or emotionally volatile.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While introverts can navigate social situations, being around too many people for too long will drain their energy. This often leads to them making excuses to leave early or avoid group events and gatherings. Others may not understand their need to be alone and assume that introverts are shy, unfriendly, or snobby. This misunderstanding may also cause well-intentioned friends to try and “cure” introverted characters by forcing them to attend social events, causing unhappiness and friction in the relationship.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Adrian Pennino (Rocky) is a typical wallflower, hiding in the shadows and preferring to keep to herself. Since her mother once told her that she didn’t have much of a body and should develop her brain, Adrian took the advice to heart, dismissing her outward appearance and turning inward. It’s not until Rocky draws her out that she fully comes into her own and is empowered to open up, gain confidence, and make herself emotionally available to someone else.Other Examples from Literature:Lena Karigalis (The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants), Lisbeth Salander (The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:adaptable, adventurous, fanatical, flamboyant, flirtatious, melodramatic, nervous, sleazy, timid

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE INTROVERTED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being interested in someone who likes to play hard to get
PLOTLINE: Being part of a highly social and extroverted family
PLOTLINE: Being forced into a leadership role
PLOTLINE: Living in an environment that offers little privacy or time to oneself
PLOTLINE: Experiencing fame or acclaim that thrusts one into the public eye
PLOTLINE: Having to share a room with one’s siblings
