IRRITATION
DEFINITION:Impatience and displeasure; the sense of being bothered

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
The lips pressing together, pursing, or flattening
Features tightening
Narrowing the eyes; squinting or tilting the head down while making eye contact
Rubbing the back of the neck
Watching the source furtively
Frowning
Crossing one’s arms
Pulling or plucking at clothing as if it chafes
Fidgety movements (scraping the hair back, curling one’s fingers, etc.)
Adopting a challenging tone
A hard smile
Poking a tongue lightly into the cheek and inhaling a long breath
Asking pointed questions
Changing the subject
Forcing a laugh
Raising the voice
Opening the mouth to say something, then thinking better of it
Biting the inside of the cheek
Restless legs (crossing and uncrossing, unable to stand still, etc.)
Going silent; disengaging from conversation
Feigning interest in other things to buy time and regain control
Making small, jittery movements with the fingers
Breathing through the nose (audibly to others)
Curling one’s toes
Clasping the hands tightly so the knuckles turn white
Interrupting people
Repeating a mannerism (scratching an eyebrow, adjusting glasses, etc.)
Spots of color entering the cheeks
Clenching one’s teeth

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Tightness in the chest
Tense muscles
Sensitive skin
A quickened pulse
A twitchy feeling in the extremities
Raised body temperature
Tightness in the jaw and facial muscles, causing discomfort

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Dismissing the source as unworthy
Trying to put the upsetting information out of one’s mind
A desire to talk the situation over with someone else
Wishing someone would stop or shut up
Stubbornly sticking to one’s belief, even if it doesn’t make sense
Clouded judgment
Judging others and their performance or contribution

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Openly challenging another’s logic or standpoint
Swearing
Negative language:You don’t know what you’re talking about!
Sarcasm
Name-calling or side insults:Can you stop that? It’s like working with a two-year-old!
Facial tics
Rising blood pressure
Snapping and saying something that offends others or damages a relationship

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
Avoiding the source
Two-faced behavior
Nitpicking
Passive-aggressive comments
Forcing oneself to not look at or acknowledge the source
Leaving the room or situation to clear one’s thoughts
Seeking to discredit the source so one won’t have to believe him or her

MAY ESCALATE TO:Resentment,Frustration,Anger

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Annoyance,Indifference,Relief

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Bark, call out, chafe, clench
exhale, frown, glare, gripe
grit, grumble, huff, judge
mutter, snap, squeeze, squirm
stiffen, swear, tense, twitch

WRITER’S TIP:Make body language unique to the character. Do they lift themselves up in their shoes as they wait in line? Do they run a finger along the seam of their jeans when they’re deep in thought? Creative emotional mannerisms help characters leap off the page.