JUST
DEFINITION:having a strong sense of fairness

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:fair-minded

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having strong beliefs about right and wrong
Being a victim of unfairness growing up (having parents who favored a sibling over oneself)
Being a victim of prejudice or unjust treatment
Espousing a religion that focuses on right vs. wrong
Growing up in an environment where fairness was emphasized

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Rejecting unfair or biased advantages
Sharing
Showing respect for others
Believing that the law should apply to everyone
Rejecting caste systems and ideals that promote inequality
Following the rules
Respecting boundaries that reinforce good relationships and fairness
Being confrontational when an injustice has occurred
Altruism
Showing disdain for cheating or short cuts
Thinking objectively
Thinking before acting
Doing the right thing even if it isn’t popular
Behaving ethically
Treating people the same, regardless of age, sex, or race
Demanding justice where it’s lacking
Refusing to gossip about others
Being empathetic
Not asking others to do something one would not do oneself
Not taking advantage of loopholes or omissions
Having strong leadership capabilities
Choosing what’s right rather than what’s easy
Feeling terrible when one makes a mistake
Understanding all the facts before offering judgment
Being an agent for change (joining a board, running for office, etc.)
Standing up for the vulnerable
Judging people by how they treat others
Identifying with victims and working to bring about justice
Not wanting to hear excuses for bad behavior
Expecting to pay for services and be paid for one’s service to others
Keeping one’s word
Becoming emotional (grief-stricken, enraged, etc.) when an injustice is discovered
Calling people out for perceived dishonesty
Striving to prove someone wrong if doing so will bring inequality to light
Becoming obsessed with righting a wrong

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I told the kids they couldn’t have more cookies, so I guess I shouldn’t eat more either.
Ben has worked here the longest. If anyone deserves a raise, it’s him.
Poor Jerry. His brothers treat him terribly and his parents don’t notice. It isn’t right.
I have no problem taking the weekend off. I worked the last three, after all.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:agitation, contempt, determination

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Just characters view the world in black and white and long for wrongs to be righted. Fair-minded, they rail against injustice and are quick to stand up for the oppressed. They aren’t afraid to do the right thing, even when their convictions bring them into conflict with powerful or influential people. Because their beliefs are often challenged by those in opposition, just characters are usually well-spoken and are able to intelligently defend their point of view.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:It’s easy for just characters to seem removed emotionally from the events around them. They can easily slip into judgmental thinking and turn vigilante in their desire for justice. If they believe that the rules have ceased to promote fairness for all, they may break them, ironically contributing to the inequality. If just characters accept misinformation for truth, flawed thinking may lead them to believe that they’re balancing the scales when in reality they are creating more turmoil or harm.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:The government of Robin Hood’s time is greedy and cruel, requiring poverty-inducing taxes from its constituents in order to line its own pockets. When Robin runs afoul of this system and experiences its coldheartedness firsthand, he gathers a band of like-minded men and sets about robbing corrupt royalty as they pass through Sherwood Forest. He then redistributes the wealth to the country’s poor, giving it back, in essence, to its original owners.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Paul Edgecombe (The Green Mile), Superman, Batman

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:gentle, greedy, hostile, irrational, obsessive, rebellious, reckless, unintelligent, weak-willed

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE JUST CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Discovering that a relative has committed a crime
PLOTLINE: Catching a mentor or trusted friend in a lie
PLOTLINE: Learning that a loved one has broken the law, but with pure motivations
PLOTLINE: Unwittingly breaking the law and having to face the consequences
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where what is fair opposes what one believes to be right
