KIND
DEFINITION:having a benevolent nature and an attitude of goodwill

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:benevolent, good-hearted

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a loving home
Sharing a strong sense of kinship with others
Having an appreciation for and connectedness with the world and its inhabitants
The belief that being kind is the right way to treat others
Experiencing euphoria at serving others and wanting to repeat the experience
Being influenced by kindness in one’s past
Being highly empathetic

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Going out of one’s way to help someone in need
Being generous with one’s money, time, and resources
Listening intently to others to show interest in what they’re saying
Taking action when someone is in need (cooking a meal, sending a card, etc.)
Using uplifting and positive words
Rallying others to come to someone’s aid
Showing kindness even when there is no benefit to oneself
Putting the needs of others above one’s own needs
Expressing true happiness over someone else’s good news
Mourning with those who have suffered loss
Responding graciously when unpleasantness occurs
Patience
Bestowing gifts
Wholeheartedly supporting someone’s dream
Holding doors open for others
Smiling frequently
Having a pleasant expression and approachable bearing
Making oneself available to others at any hour of the day
Befriending the friendless
Phrasing things as nicely as possible
Going out of one’s way to keep from offending others
Building people up rather than tearing them down
Being a good listener
Proactively helping
Brightening someone’s day for no reason
Excusing the behavior of others
Expressing sadness or anger when seeing others treated unkindly
Using peaceful means to resolve conflict
Being content with what one has
Not sharing one’s opinion if it will hurt someone else
Noticing positives and commenting on them (offering compliments, noting nice weather)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Looks like raccoons got into Gran’s trash again. I’ll sweep the mess up right away.
I may as well do Stan’s lawn while I’m mowing my own.
I’ll ask Molly if she needs someone to collect her mail while she’s away.
Everyone’s so grumpy at work lately. Brownies should cheer them up.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:eagerness, gratitude, happiness, love, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Kind characters are genuine and forthright, drawing people in with their giving natures and positive attitudes. Observant and often great listeners, they provide uplifting words or gestures when others need them most. Many kindhearted people see it as their duty to help when and where they can, even if it requires a sacrifice of some sort.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Kind characters know how to bestow acts of generosity but often grow flustered when kindness is returned to them. They may feel compelled to refuse a gift or repay the kindness, which can leave the giver feeling dissatisfied. They also commonly decline help or won’t admit when it’s needed, denying others the chance to experience the feel-good rush that comes from giving. Because they are givers and not takers, kind characters can be easily manipulated and abused by those who would take advantage of them.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Peeta, the male tribute from District Twelve inThe Hunger Games, shows kindness and compassion for others, even when everyone is out for themselves. As a child, he gives burnt bread to a starving Katniss and suffers a beating for it. In the Capitol, Peeta does everything in his power to make Katniss appear likable to benefactors, then continues to protect her as she is hunted by other tributes throughout the course of the games.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Wendy Beamish (St. Elmo’s Fire), Fezzik (The Princess Bride)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, dishonest, independent, self-centered, wounded

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE KIND CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living in an environment where kindness is rare and cause for suspicion
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where one’s motives are questioned
PLOTLINE: Teaming up with someone who openly takes advantage of one’s kindness
PLOTLINE: Dealing with selfish people
PLOTLINE: Being kind to someone who only seems to make trouble
PLOTLINE: Finding out that one’s kindness is not wanted or needed
