LOYAL
DEFINITION:unswervingly devoted
*Note: The object of one’s loyalty can be a person, institution, or ideal

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:committed, dedicated, devoted, faithful, staunch, steadfast, true

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Experiencing loyalty in the past and valuing it
Experiencing betrayal in the past and wanting no part of it
Love
Coming from a strict military or religious background where loyalty was expected
Believing that the object of one’s loyalty is more important than oneself
Fear of retribution
Being highly appreciative and desiring to show one’s gratitude

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Showing extreme devotion to rock bands, celebrities, sports figures, etc.
Proselytizing; trying to win over more fans
Seeking out others who share one’s affection for the object
Talking incessantly about the object
Striving to make oneself more visible or noticeable to the object
Not tolerating any negative words spoken about the object
Taking interest in the object’s hobbies and activities
Protecting the object at all costs (ignoring misbehaviors, lying to cover things up, etc.)
Putting the object’s needs and desires above one’s own
Spending a great deal of time with the object
Believing the best of the object
Taking steps to further the object’s dreams or goals
Dismissing or shunning anyone who speaks badly of the object
Supporting the object even when one privately disagrees
Encouraging others to be loyal to the object
Sacrificing or going without if it helps the object
Maintaining friendships over long periods of time and distance
Developing deep relationships, as opposed to superficial ones
Changing one’s plans to accommodate the object
Expressing empathy for the object (mourning, celebrating, worrying, etc.)
Feeling great pride at the object’s achievements
Seeking out ways to serve or help the object
Craving the object’s affirmation or attention
Maneuvering conversations so the object can be discussed
Not being able to be objective about the object
Rearranging one’s schedule in order to accommodate the object
Often giving more than one receives

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
How dare he say that about her?
This isn’t convenient for me, but if it’s what she needs, of course I’ll do it.
Ahhhh. I get to see Juliette this weekend!
Dominic sure loves baseball. I should try and get into it, too.
Lucas is such a great man. I would follow him anywhere.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, anticipation, defensiveness, eagerness, gratitude, happiness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Loyalty is a valued quality, so characters who embody this trait will gain respect from the reader. This kind of devotion will lead people to do things they normally wouldn’t do and provides a means through which to advance your plot. The beauty of loyalty as a trait is that it can be paired with so many other qualities, giving you an endless array of choices for your character.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Blind loyalty can lead characters to back someone even when they don’t agree with them. When truth is on the line, this can damage their credibility. Their desire to support the object of their loyalty can lead them to sacrifice their own desires, needs, ideals, and beliefs. In extreme cases, these characters can become obsessive and unhealthy and lose the ability to think for themselves.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Sam Gamgee (The Lord of the Rings) has one driving desire: to serve and protect Frodo—whether that means putting his own life in danger, standing up to Aragorn, spying on Frodo himself, or taking up the ring’s burden when his friend is unable to do so. His loyalty is so ingrained that even when it requires sacrifice and pain, Sam remains faithful.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Forrest Gump (Forrest Gump), Chuckie Sullivan (Good Will Hunting), Rubeus Hagrid (Harry Potterseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:antisocial, disloyal, flaky, greedy, hypocritical, indecisive, selfish

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE LOYAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being loyal to someone who does or says something that goes against one’s moral beliefs
PLOTLINE: Being loyal to people or organizations with opposing needs or desires
PLOTLINE: Experiencing betrayal
PLOTLINE: Watching the core principles and beliefs of an organization change to something less noble
PLOTLINE: Witnessing the object of one’s loyalty behave with corruption or malice
