MATURE
DEFINITION:showing strong mental development or wisdom

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:seasoned

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being a firstborn child
Being forced into responsibility at an early age
Being taught the importance of wisdom and being encouraged to think for oneself
Being highly self-aware
Having a strong interest in the outer world and how it relates to oneself
Experiencing a traumatic or life-altering event
Living in an environment of day-to-day survival
Having adults as one’s peers

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Taking responsibility for one’s actions
Seeing the natural consequences of one’s choices and acting accordingly
Thinking things through
Seeking out wise counsel
Not being overly affected by peer pressure
Having a serious or somber manner
Planning ahead
Worrying
Taking on responsibility for others
Not engaging in age-appropriate activities
Focusing more on work than on having fun or relaxing
Difficulty properly relating to people one’s age
Expressing disdain for those who lack one’s level of maturity
Attempting to lead one’s peers
Bossiness:I don’t care if you don’t want to do it. It’s not a choice!
Taking risks
Taking on responsibilities that should be beyond one’s capability or skill level
Boldness
Independent thinking
Confidence
Patience
Treating one’s elders as one’s equals
Exhibiting self-control
Listening more and talking less
Speaking in an inoffensive way
Being observant
Sizing up a situation or conversation before joining in
Decisiveness
Identifying and solving problems in a sensible fashion
Not engaging in behavior that is deliberately inconsiderate or disrespectful
Setting goals
Being willing to delay gratification

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
They’re depending on me. I can’t let them down.
A vacation would be nice, but I can’t afford it right now.
I wish I could have Monday off, but there’s nothing I can do about it.
Girls my age are so silly. All they care about are clothes and boys.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, happiness, pride, resentment, satisfaction, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Mature characters are responsible, trustworthy, thoughtful, and tend to be more consistent in behavior than their peers. Often viewed as deep thinkers, they can articulate their thoughts at a level beyond their years or offer wisdom that seems greater than average. Mature characters are moralistic and have strong reasoning skills. They understand the cause-effect relationship and base decisions and actions on their perceptions of right and wrong.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Mature characters can be critical of others, making judgments based on their own accelerated development and advanced outlook. Others may view these individuals as bossy, being too serious, or lacking a sense of fun or spontaneity. Characters who are forced into maturity before their time may feel resentment and anger for having to be responsible, while siblings may be made to feel less than adequate when adults uphold the mature character as someone to be emulated.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Katniss Everdeen (The Hunger Games) is forced to grow up prematurely when her father dies and her mother sinks into depression. She becomes the provider for her mother and younger sister and also feels a lesser responsibility for many of the people in District 12. Hardworking, independent, and somber, she has survival as an end goal and bases most of her decisions on achieving that end.Other Examples from Literature:Darry Curtis (The Outsiders), Dicey Tillerman (Homecoming)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:charismatic, excitable, foolish, indecisive, insecure, manipulative, reckless, witty

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE MATURE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Pursuing a goal for which an immature trait (impulsivity, playfulness, etc.) would be beneficial
PLOTLINE: Being forced to conform to or interact equally with one’s less mature peers
PLOTLINE: Experiencing disastrous consequences when one does cut loose and have some fun
PLOTLINE: Becoming mature out of necessity and greatly resenting it
