MERCIFUL
DEFINITION:displaying leniency from one’s position of power; showing compassion

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:compassionate, gracious, humane

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being naturally empathetic
Being vulnerable and helpless in the past
Having a strong sense of right and wrong
Wanting to alleviate suffering
Having mentors or teachers who displayed compassion
Valuing others
Having a strong sense of justice

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Forgiveness
Meting out justice with compassion
Being able to put oneself in another’s shoes
Treating others with respect and fairness
Helping those who are in need
Choosing to instruct rather than punish
Encouraging others to grow, learn, and better themselves
Being unbiased
Leading by example
Patience
Not holding grudges
Offering comfort through understanding
Being a strong listener
Reflecting on the big picture instead of being caught up in the little details
Offering grace to those in need
Being hopeful for change in every case
Open-mindedness
Treating others the way one wishes to be treated
Speaking truth from the heart
Lifting people up rather than tearing them down
Recognizing opportunities to make a difference
Not being afraid to show compassion
Looking past people’s actions to their motives
Empathizing with others
Being able to set aside ego and personal feelings
Acting out of a desire to help people rather than a desire to enact justice or punish

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Andy already feels bad about what happened. Why punish him further?
I know what Carla’s dealing with at home, so I’m going to overlook her rudeness.
I’m giving Sarah another chance. If I don’t give up on her, maybe she won’t either.
Liam gave me a hard time when I lost, but I won’t do the same to him. Failing hurts.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:conflicted, embarrassment, gratitude, guilt, hopefulness, remorse, satisfaction, somberness, sympathy

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Characters who embody mercy have a level of understanding and compassion that elevates them above petty jealousy, bitterness, or spite. They feel no need to make an example of others or rejoice in their defeat. Instead, they feel a sense of sadness when things end badly and prefer to embrace the belief that that while mistakes happen and poor choices are made, grace and forgiveness are the actions that will bring about peace.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Those who value achievement and success may view merciful characters as weak, mistaking their graciousness for reluctance or fear to do what needs to be done. Those who have been wronged may grow angry and resentful when the character shows compassion to a wrongdoer. Accusations of favoritism may arise, damaging the merciful one’s standing with allies.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:InLes Misérables, Bishop Myriel of Digne offers shelter to a recently paroled convict, who then steals the bishop’s silver and flees. When the authorities find the convict, they bring him back so charges can be pressed. Instead of punishing him, the bishop claims to have given him the silver and then adds a matching set of candlesticks to the gift. His generosity and words of mercy encourage Jean Valjean to make an honest living for himself and rise above his past, which in turn gives him the opportunity to show mercy to many others down the road.Other Examples from Literature:Frodo (The Lord of the Rings)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, cruel, judgmental, opinionated, paranoid, repressed, suspicious, vindictive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE MERCIFUL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Showing mercy even when one suspects the person may be beyond redemption
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where showing mercy now will mean pain for all later
PLOTLINE: Offering a merciful judgment that one knows will upset others
PLOTLINE: Knowing that others are judging one’s actions and questioning one’s ability to lead
