METICULOUS
DEFINITION:taking great care with minute details

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:exact, fastidious, precise, scrupulous, thorough

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being a perfectionist
Being raised by fastidious parents in a strict environment
Mental disabilities (OCD, anorexia, etc.)
Phobias (fear of germs, failure, etc.)
Having high standards for oneself and others
Fear of letting others down or of retribution for not meeting a certain standard
A need for approval

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Paying close attention to the tiniest details of a project
Taking one’s responsibilities seriously
Always doing one’s best
Taking pride in one’s work
Obsessively cleaning and tidying
Micromanaging others
Going over and over the details in one’s mind, looking for things that were missed
Expressing aggravation when people don’t strive for the same standard
Checking the quality of other people’s work
Maintaining a neat appearance
Being inefficient due to the need to get things just right
Planning ahead
Making lists
Becoming easily frustrated by change or unexpected circumstances
Double-checking to make sure a task has been done right
Frequent fine-tuning or fiddling
Being a loner
Having a hard time working with others
Having high expectations
Offering guidance and advice even when it isn’t wanted or needed
Thriving in a job or role that others may find monotonous
Finding comfort in repetition and structure
Being good at organizing events and keeping track of projects
Having a good memory
Following up and checking in
Staying up-to-date with the latest news or research in one’s field
Perfectionism
Preferring to work within deadlines
Keeping concise and complete notes
Thriving under pressure

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
This is good, but it could be better.
What else needs to be done here?
I should make sure everyone knows what they’re supposed to be doing.
Why do I have to work with these people? All they want to do is socialize.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:annoyance, determination, frustration, impatience, satisfaction, smugness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Meticulous characters strive for a certain standard in everything they do. Their determination to achieve that standard often translates into a strong work ethic. These characters are reliable and their resistance to change makes them fairly predictable. They’re strong planners, are detail oriented, and are dedicated to seeing a project through to the end despite setbacks.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While their focus on projects is admirable, it can become all-consuming, to the point where meticulous characters neglect other areas of life. The bar that they set for themselves and others can be so high as to become unrealistic. Many of these characters expect others to be as fastidious as they are and express frustration or disdain when the people around them fall short of their expectation. This, combined with their need to micromanage and their mistrust of the quality of other people’s work, can make it difficult for them to work as part of a team.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Felix Ungar (The Odd Couple) is a notorious neat freak and compulsive cleaner. He shows meticulousness in other areas, too, such as cooking, personal hygiene, and punctuality. He’s fastidious in his care for his children and ex-wife, loving them so intensely that his attention becomes somewhat smothering. After his divorce, it’s this need to care for others that drives him to move in with his slovenly friend, Oscar.Other Examples from Film and TV:Colonel Jessup (A Few Good Men), Adrian Monk (Monk)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:disorganized, easygoing, extravagant, flaky, forgetful, impulsive, quirky

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE METICULOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living with a messy roommate
PLOTLINE: Working on a project with a fly-by-the-seat-of-the-pants co-worker
PLOTLINE: Having to stay in an unclean hotel room
PLOTLINE: Being unable to bathe or change one’s clothes for an extended period of time
PLOTLINE: Having to answer to a careless project manager
