NATURE-FOCUSED
DEFINITION:preferring natural resources over artificial ones; being strongly attuned to nature

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:environmentally conscious

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up on a farm or living off the land
Having parents or role models who were conservationists or environmentalists
Having strong religious or spiritual beliefs that focus on nature
Feeling whole when surrounded by nature
Growing up within a nature-focused culture (Native American, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Keeping a garden
Recycling
Placing a high value on life
Buying natural products (shopping at farmer’s markets, etc.)
Hunting and fishing only to provide for one’s family
Living in nature or close to it
Farming or ranching; living off the land
Respecting all living creatures
Being fascinated with the life cycle
Feeling spiritually tied to the earth and its creatures
Eating natural foods
Being knowledgeable about nutrition
Avoiding wastefulness (reusing, repurposing, only taking what one needs, etc.)
Canning and preserving one’s food
Engaging in hiking, climbing, canoeing, and other outdoor pursuits
Avoiding pollutants and chemicals
Farming with heirloom seeds rather than altered ones
Embracing natural remedies rather than manmade ones
Meditating
Having a hearty appetite
Being highly curious
Being highly energetic
Choosing environmentally friendly modes of transportation
Feeling energized when one is outdoors
Deeply appreciating the beauty of nature
Wanting to be alone to experience the outdoors in a meaningful way
Being hyper aware of what goes into one’s body
Picking up after oneself to decrease one’s carbon footprint
Bird-watching
Focusing on sensory details (smells, sounds, textures, etc.) when outdoors
Happiness and satisfaction
Seeing wisdom in nature
Appreciating the different seasons and their uniqueness
Feeling protective of nature
Gaining joy from growing a garden

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’m going to brew some lavender and fresh oregano tea for Natalie’s headache.
Is it five o’clock yet? I’ve been waiting all week to see the mountains!
I am so glad we moved out of the city. Out here, I can hear myself think.
Tomatoes from the garden are so much better than ones from the grocery store.
I can’t believe Nathan refuses to recycle. Has he seen the size of our landfill?
Look at that sunrise. It’s lighting up the whole valley.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, anticipation, curiosity, excitement, gratitude, happiness, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Nature-focused characters are strongly attuned to nature. When outdoors, they are energized, experience mental clarity, and gain a higher sense of purpose. Their respect for the land and the creatures in it leads them to make choices that impact the natural world as little as possible. They are usually active and health-conscious and are very aware of what they put into their bodies, many times choosing a vegetarian or vegan lifestyle due to their beliefs.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with a high respect for nature may experience a disconnect with friends and family who are more urban-focused—especially if these loved ones see the character as being flaky for their views. Some nature-centric characters choose to oppose industry and government to protect the environment, thereby crossing the line from being advocates to becoming vigilantes. Others take natural living to an extreme, refusing to bathe, shave, or use deodorant. The resulting poor hygiene puts a strain on relationships.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:InAvatar, the Na’vi race is highly attuned to Pandora. They are part of a biological neural network connecting all life forms and so have the greatest respect and care for their world. They live with, interact with, and take wisdom from the nature around them. When threatened by human industry seeking out a rare mineral, the Na’vi fight to save not only their lives but nature itself.Other Examples from Literature and Film:the Ents (Lord of the Rings), Pocahontas(Pocahontas), Perrin Aybara (The Wheel of Time)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:destructive, industrious, insensitive, pompous, superficial, workaholic

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE NATURE-FOCUSED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s property to a natural disaster or financial ruin
PLOTLINE: Having family or neighbors who are destructive and wasteful in ways that impact nature
PLOTLINE: Being forced to move to the city where one cannot easily access nature
PLOTLINE: Conditions that prevent one from enjoying the outdoors (severe allergies, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where saving a natural resource is bad for the public at large
