NOSTALGIA
DEFINITION:Fondly recalling a past period or situation one would like to revisit

NOTES:While nostalgia and homesickness are often seen as the same thing, there are subtle differences between the two. The former is typically a fond remembering, while the latter is a deeper feeling that’s often coupled with a strong sense of sadness or even grief. If your character is feeling HOMESICK, see that entry for ideas on how it might be expressed.

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
An unfocused gaze
A slight smile
Slowly flipping through old pictures, stroking the pages
A relaxed posture
Eyes that fill with happy tears
Using a quiet voice
Cocking one’s head to the side while remembering
Subdued laughter
A shallow sigh
An unhurried walk
Slouching on a sofa, watching old movies from the time period one fondly remembers
Slow, languid movements
Growing animated when memory is triggered (an old song playing on the radio, etc.)
Eyes brightening as memories are recalled
Keeping mementos from the happy time
Telling and retelling stories about the past
Seeking out those who share one’s memories
Gently touching memorable items (a baby blanket, wedding invitations, etc.)
Closing one’s eyes to more clearly recall the memories
Trying to recreate a past event (burning the same scented candle, wearing the old clothes, etc.)
Walking through one’s house and remembering how things used to look before one’s children moved on
Seeing similarities in the present:You look just like him,orThis is the same color as our first car.
Increased tenderness (sitting close, a quick kiss, etc.) for those who shared in the event
Talking frequently about the past
Baking an old dessert that was a favorite of the person one is remembering
Visiting special places (the kids’ favorite playground, a favorite restaurant, etc.)
Using social networks to find old friends and family
Remembering only the good about the time or person; forgetting the negative associations
Seeking to reconnect (phoning out of the blue, arranging a visit, etc.)

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Eyes prickling with tears
An excited flutter in the belly
An overall relaxation of the body
The breaths slowing as a memory takes over
Thickness in the throat
Dulled awareness—e.g., sitting in an uncomfortable position without feeling it
Experiencing (to a lesser degree) the same physical sensations felt during the past event

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Losing track of the time while remembering
A desire to go back and visit the past
Mentally replaying past events
Pushing oneself to recall small details (the color of a friend’s jacket, the name of a child’s best friend who often stayed for dinner, etc.) to make the memory more vivid
Regrets resurfacing (things one didn’t say or do, or how one held back, etc.) that one must process and let go of to regain the happy state of remembering
Satisfaction at having experienced the event despite any pain or loss resulting from it

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Discontentment with the way things presently are
Choosing to reconnect with someone, even if it means working past a challenge (e.g., a past falling-out, dealing with problematic family members, a fear of flying, etc.)
Reconnecting with a past joy (volunteering, teaching dance lessons again, rejoining a choir to sing, etc.)
Expressing more emotion about the past than the present
Spending large periods of time in the past
Hoarding tendencies
Neglecting current duties or relationships
An inability to move on

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
An austere lack of mementos from the past
Sniffing back tears
Rejecting opportunities to revisit the past (reunions, trips to the old hometown, etc.)
Not engaging in conversations about the past
Refusing to speak about someone, or changing the topic when their name comes up
Masking nostalgia with practicality:I kept his toys so he could give them to his kids.

MAY ESCALATE TO:Longing,Dissatisfaction,Sadness,Happiness,Sappy

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Wistful,Gratitude,Satisfaction,Connectedness

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Call, caress, celebrate, cradle
cry, grasp, graze, grieve
grin, hold, honor, hug
joke, kiss, laugh, meditate
memorialize, peruse, ponder, pore over
recall, reflect, relive, remember
reminisce, retell, share, sigh
smooth, stroke, voice

WRITER’S TIP:When introducing and describing characters, parcel out personal details in small bits. Anything that isn’t pivotal to plot or characterization can be left to the reader’s imagination.