NURTURING
DEFINITION:having the desire and ability to nourish and further the development of others

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:caring, maternal

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being responsible in the past as a nurturer of others (children, the infirm, etc.)
Being the recipient of great love and kindness
Wanting to be needed
Having an abundance of love
Gratitude; caring for someone out of appreciation for the kindness they have shown
Having an innate tendency to nurture others

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Using kind, encouraging words
Speaking in a calm tone
Patience
Taking advantage of gentle teaching opportunities
Anticipating a need and meeting it
Actively listening, to show that one cares
Providing for someone’s basic needs
Being protective
Jumping to someone’s defense
Encouraging someone to pursue a talent or area of giftedness
Showing support
Keeping mementos in the hopes of passing them down to loved ones some day
Treating strangers like family; being a good host
Worrying over setbacks or poor choices that may happen to those in one’s care
Being present for important events
Showing affection
Having the best interests of others at heart
Spotting an emotional need and seeking to fill it
Doing what’s best for someone, even if it’s not what the other person wants
Providing wisdom when decisions must be made
Self-sacrifice; going without so someone else can have what is lacking
Constantly assessing what a person needs
Steering someone away from dangerous situations
Expressing joy over the little things one’s charge might do
Seeing the best in people and believing that anyone can change when shown love
Feeling pride and satisfaction when the one being nurtured shows growth
Doing whatever it takes to make sure someone feels safe and loved
Loyalty
Difficulty being objective when it comes to one’s charges
Showing mercy; giving second chances
Forgiving easily
Being a natural caregiver, even with other people’s charges
Showing confidence in others to encourage them to be more confident in themselves

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
She’s a good girl. She just needs a little guidance.
I’ve been there; maybe she can benefit from my experience.
It’s supposed to get cold later. I’ll make sure Richard takes his coat.
I’ve been shown so much love; how can I not pass that on?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, amusement, happiness, hopefulness, love, nostalgia, satisfaction, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Nurturing characters are generally loving, kind, and compassionate. They have a long-term focus, wanting their charges to not just survive but to thrive and succeed in life. When they see someone in need or in pain, they can’t help but reach out, even if it means sacrificing their own time, money, and resources. While others may be quick to judge or stereotype, nurturers are open-minded, seeing only the need and their own ability to meet it.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Sometimes, the nurturing instinct can be so strong that characters with this trait are unable or unwilling to see the truth about their charges. Their unselfishness can make them the target of manipulators who would take advantage of their kindness. Nurturers are often so focused on caring for others that they don’t take care of themselves. Their desire to serve can also make it difficult for them to seek help for themselves when it’s needed.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Aibilene Clark (The Help) has spent her career raising other women’s children. She feeds them, potty trains them, puts them to bed, and cares for them when they’re sick. Her capacity for love and empathy is deep, as is shown with her final charge, Mae Mobley. Aibilene does her best to make up for the indifference and neglect of Mae’s mother by creating a positive mantra for the child to live by, repeating it until the love-starved little girl can say it for herself.Other Examples from Film:Carol Connelly (As Good as it Gets), Molly Weasley (Harry Potterseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:grumpy, independent, mischievous, needy, selfish, ungrateful

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE NURTURING CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Encountering someone who needs love but is unable to accept or return it
PLOTLINE: Experiencing criticism and judgment for taking someone in
PLOTLINE: Finding someone in need of help whose needs are beyond one’s ability to meet
PLOTLINE: Recognizing a need for nurturing in someone who is likely damaged beyond repair
PLOTLINE: Wanting to care for someone whom the authorities say should not be nurtured
