OBEDIENT
DEFINITION:submissive to authority

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:biddable, compliant, dutiful, submissive, tame, well-behaved

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
A subservient nature
Having been taught the importance of respecting authority
Seeing the value of authority in society
Fear of retribution
A desire to please
The belief that following the rules leads to reward
A strong sense of fairness
Seeing others be punished for asking questions or displaying independent thinking
Coming from a strict religious or military background that required obedience
Gratitude and loyalty; obeying someone because of what they did in the past

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Following orders immediately
Reading the manual before assembling an item
Seeking out the advice of people in authority
Trusting that those in authority have one’s best interests at heart
Obeying an order or rule despite private misgivings
Proactively getting approval before acting
Understanding that everyone has a part to play for society to function
Being a team player
Carrying out tasks efficiently
Believing that something greater is at work and feeling appreciation for it
Respecting order (keeping a neat room, being organized, etc.)
Obeying rules even if it’s inconvenient (driving the speed limit, making curfew, etc.)
Encouraging others to follow the rules
Feeling relief to not be the one making the tough decisions
Tattling when others fail to comply
Expressing resentment when those who don’t follow the rules escape punishment
Wanting to know the expectations of those in charge
Feeling safe and protected
Being a law-abiding citizen
Following through on responsibilities at work or school; being dependable
Joining organizations or clubs that have a clear hierarchy
Loyalty
Respectfully speaking to and about those in authority
Becoming uncomfortable when others question those in authority
Experiencing confusion when those in authority do something unusual or untrustworthy
Consistency
Seeking the approval of authority figures rather than the approval of one’s peers
Being easily cowed
Feeling trepidation when breaking even an innocent rule
Feeling shame when one breaks a rule and is discovered
Choosing to hang out with other obedient people

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
It’s a dumb rule but I’ll follow it anyway.
Mom said to do it, so I will.
If everyone just followed the rules, we wouldn’t have all these problems in the world.
I did such a good job on this project. Good thing Emily gave me an outline to follow.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:happiness, indifference, resignation, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Obedient characters are loyal and trusting. Reliable, responsible, and fairly predictable, they will usually do what they’re told without causing trouble. Their belief in upholding the social order makes them upstanding citizens.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Whatever the reason for their compliance, obedient characters may have trouble thinking for themselves; this can be used for ill as well as for good. If asked, the devoutly obedient character might find himself doing things he never would have done, simply because someone he trusts asked him to. Having pledged his allegiance to those in charge, he might have trouble believing or even suspecting that those same people might be untrustworthy.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Despite his impoverished and difficult life, Charlie Bucket (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory) is a hopeful and obedient boy. His tour of the Wonka factory involves some strange rules that the other ticket winners unhesitatingly flout. But Charlie does what he’s told and is eventually rewarded for his good behavior.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Darth Vader (Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope), Grace Van Pelt (The Mentalist), Ofelia (Pan’s Labyrinth)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:adventurous, controlling, free-spirited, intelligent, mischievous, observant, rebellious, resentful, rowdy, selfish, silly, suspicious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE OBEDIENT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being asked to do something that goes against one’s moral code
PLOTLINE: Learning that the motives or character of those in authority may be questionable
PLOTLINE: Conflicting interests, such as wanting to obey a teacher while wanting to conform to one’s peers
PLOTLINE: Being paired with an independent thinker who enjoys flouting authority
PLOTLINE: Having two authority figures who make conflicting requests
