OBSERVANT
DEFINITION:paying careful attention
*Note: Beingobservantrefers to one’s ability to notice things, while beingperceptiveinvolves the ability to understand and draw conclusions from things that have been observed. While closely related, the two traits aren’t synonymous, nor do they always go hand in hand.

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:attentive, keen, sharp-eyed

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Nosiness
Shyness; involving oneself through observation rather than participation
Curiosity
Being highly intelligent and easily bored
A fear of missing something important
Paranoia

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Noticing when someone’s mood has changed
Commenting when someone has gotten a haircut or is wearing new clothes
Listening in on multiple conversations
People watching
Picking up on someone’s nervous tics or habits and asking them what’s wrong
Accurately reporting what fellow students or co-workers have done all day long
Noticing details that others might miss
Seeing potential dangers before they occur
Instantly sizing up a room upon entering
Having excellent recall
Having heightened senses
Being cautious
Accurately repeating things that were said at a much earlier time
Taking safety and precaution seriously
Watching for certain details (whether someone is armed or looks suspicious, etc.)
Taking note of internal warnings and acting on them
Having a focused mind that isn’t prone to wandering or daydreaming
Observing instead of busying oneself with other things (reading, surfing the net, etc.)
Avoiding distractions while driving
Noting the exit points upon entering a building
Not being in a rush
Looking people in the eye
Being mindful of body language and expressions
Reading into someone’s tone, vocal hesitations, or word choices
Being nosy
Watching for cause and effect so one always knows what’s happening
Taking care to place items where they will not be tipped over or tripped on
Knowing where one’s personal items are at all times
Noticing pattern breaks (a co-worker’s frequent absences, keys going missing, etc.)
Sitting with one’s back to the wall so one can watch the whole room
Being aware of one’s body and noticing changes that might indicate illness

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Denise got a new haircut. It looks great!
Why is that guy hanging out by my car?
Oh, Aunt Kathy rearranged the furniture.
Maggie looks sad today. I’ll have to try and figure out why.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, curiosity, unease, wariness, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Observant characters notice things that others miss. By and large, people want to beseen, so the attentiveness of these characters makes others feel good. They also provide the author with a dependable observer through whom to relay important details. Those who sit back and watch are less likely to be caught in a dangerous situation or surprised by someone intent on doing harm. Due to their clear-sightedness, they can often identify threats before they happen and save themselves and others from danger.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Observant characters are often nosy—eavesdropping and spying in situations where their attention isn’t wanted. It’s also easy to draw the wrong conclusions when one is only getting part of the story, so these characters run the risk of passing erroneous judgment with the information they gather. Although many observers are subtle in their technique, some are not, and their attention can make others uncomfortable.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Sherlock Holmes seems to have prescience about everyone and everything, but on closer examination, it becomes clear that the detective is simply a brilliant observer. Not only does he take meticulous note of his surroundings, he’s able to put those details together to make discoveries that evade others.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Amelia Donaghy (The Bone Collector), The Terminator (The Terminatorfranchise)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:excitable, inattentive, lazy, paranoid, scatterbrained, sentimental, unsocial

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE OBSERVANT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being hindered by something that inhibits one’s observation skills (medication, lack of sleep, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Living in a chaotic, ever-changing environment that makes it difficult to track changes
PLOTLINE: Being a keen observer who lacks perceptiveness (making no conclusions from one’s observations)
PLOTLINE: Having a terrible memory; being unable to recall one’s observations
