OPTIMISTIC
DEFINITION:anticipating the best possible outcome; seeing events in the most positive light

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:hopeful, positive, sanguine

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Believing that people are basically good and well-intentioned
Living by the philosophy that if one believes things to be a certain way, they will be
Naïveté
Growing up sheltered
Not wanting to acknowledge or give credence to anything unpleasant
Focusing on a greater purpose that makes life’s troubles inconsequential by comparison

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Assuming the best of people
Waking up happy and going to bed contented
Smiling and laughing
Having an uplifted countenance
Approaching new tasks with eagerness
Seeing a difficult job as an opportunity to learn and grow
Thinking positively
Trusting others
Finding something good to say even in a bad situation
Generosity
Refusing to acknowledge any possibility but a good outcome
Using kind, encouraging words
Being a peacekeeper
Looking forward to the future and whatever may come
Moving in a purposeful way; not moving in a lazy or reluctant fashion
Not letting oneself be bored or idle; finding meaningful ways to occupy one’s time
Not complaining
Finding joy in the little things
Choosing not to dwell on the negative
Recognizing a difficult situation as being temporary
Having a sense of humor
Accepting things the way they are
Not sweating the small stuff
Believing that life is precious
Avoiding people who are chronically negative
Choosing not to worry
Enjoying books and movies that have happy outcomes
Viewing mistakes as learning opportunities
Playing matchmaker; wanting others to share in one’s happiness
Being supportive; encouraging people in the pursuit of their goals and dreams
Believing that occasional setbacks make success more meaningful and satisfying

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
This is only temporary. Things will be better soon.
I’m so excited to get to babysit the grandkids again!
Too bad Angel didn’t pass the bar exam. I’m sure she’ll ace it the second time around.
What wonderful opportunities are coming my way today?
It really is a beautiful world.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, anticipation, eagerness, elation, excitement, gratitude, hopefulness, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Optimistic characters are usually pleasant to be around. As peacemakers, they strive to maintain happiness and good relations, so they’re not often the cause of conflict. Their positive vibes rub off on others and beget more positivity. They often have other admirable qualities as well, such as respectfulness, compassion, and diplomacy. In a world full of naysayers, optimists bring light and hope and can be a safe haven for your hero in a difficult time.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Some optimists choose positivity over reality, refusing to accept things the way they really are. This can render them unrealistic and impractical. In serious situations, their die-hard hope in the face of impossible circumstances can become frustrating. At times like these, they lose credibility for being naïve and illogical. These extreme optimists are completely unprepared to cope with the worst-case scenario; in such a situation, they may become a burden to those around them instead of a support.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Pollyanna Whittier’s (Pollyanna) life as an orphan living with a crusty aunt is far from easy. But through her employment of The Glad Game, which she once played with her father, she’s able to find the good in every situation. This is what it means to be an optimist, and Pollyanna’s example is so authentic that her name has come to be synonymous with the trait.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Giselle (Enchanted), Anne Shirley (Anne of Green Gables)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:honest, confrontational, pessimistic, pushy, resentful, rowdy, superstitious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE OPTIMISTIC CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where there is no good outcome
PLOTLINE: Being paired with an overly intelligent or suspicious character who questions everything
PLOTLINE: Suffering a disillusionment that causes doubt (betrayal by a loved one, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being faced with a scenario where one must temper optimism with practicality
PLOTLINE: Being surrounded by cynics who believe it to be their duty to open the optimist’s eyes to reality
PLOTLINE: Developing a mental illness that steals one’s optimism (depression, for example)
