ORGANIZED
DEFINITION:being orderly and systematic in one’s handling of matters

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:methodical, orderly, structured, systematic

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
A need for efficiency
Compensating for being easily overwhelmed
Being highly responsible; not wanting to let others down
Growing up in a very structured environment
OCD and similar disorders

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Scheduling events well in advance
Being detail oriented
Keeping a neat workspace
Implementing systems for managing projects or a schedule
Frequently checking emails and messages
Having good time management
Communicating clearly and frequently with associates
Over-communicating with others
Anticipating setbacks and difficulties
Micromanaging others
Delegating tasks to others
Keeping lists
Knowing one’s capabilities and scheduling accordingly
Arriving at one’s destination early or on time
Keeping to a schedule
Keeping a calendar of events (birthdays, anniversaries, holidays, etc.)
Having a place for everything and keeping everything in its place
Expressing frustration when others don’t put things where they belong
Expecting others to also be neat and orderly
Obsessively picking up and putting things away
Having multiple to-do lists
Investing in organizational tools (software, bins, containers, organizers, etc.)
Becoming agitated when things are in disarray
Organizing even obscure things and places (archived files, basements, attics, etc.)
Noticing and feeling satisfied when things are running smoothly
Thinking sequentially, in terms of steps
Gaining satisfaction from checking items off of a list
Making efforts to organize events and gatherings that lack order
Being very aware of the time
Frequently checking email and one’s phone for messages
Impatience when one’s questions aren’t answered in a timely manner

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I need a system for this.
Why can’t people put things where they belong?
Ahhh, the container store. My favorite place on the planet.
Time to knock some things off my to-do list!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:irritation, peacefulness, pride, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Organized characters are adept at making things run smoothly. They’re meticulous with details and plan well in advance, so nothing becomes overlooked. They like to be dependable, and feel personally responsible when they let others down. Hardworking, nose-to-the-grindstone individuals, they take care of the important daily details that allow other characters to be less organized. As such, they make great support characters.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Organized characters can be so focused on the minutia that their priorities become skewed and they lose sight of the big picture. Their need for order makes it difficult for them to focus in an unruly environment, limiting their efficiency under less-than-ideal circumstances. They can also struggle when working with others who lack their passion for order or who like to arrange things differently.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Squadron Leader Roger Bartlett (The Great Escape) is the organizational genius behind an ambitious escape plan that took place at Stalag Luft III, one of the highest security prisoner-of-war camps ever built. Bartlett, also known as The Big X, is determined to initiate the biggest POW breakout in history. With the help of his team, he furtively arranges for the digging of numerous tunnels, the redistribution of vast amounts of dirt, and the manufacture of civilian clothing and false documents for two hundred men, all under the noses of the guards.Other Examples from Film:Itzhak Stern (Schindler’s List), Jack Byrnes (Meet the Parents), Jackie Harrison (Stepmom)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:artistic, disorganized, easygoing, flaky, foolish, forgetful, impulsive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE ORGANIZED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being grouped with disorganized people
PLOTLINE: Having to organize without the tools and implements one is used to utilizing
PLOTLINE: Living in an environment where personal space isn’t valued
PLOTLINE: Becoming so overcommitted that organization of everything is virtually impossible
