PASSIONATE
DEFINITION:being capable of or expressing deep feeling

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:earnest, fervent, zealous

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Feeling things on a deep emotional level
Being in touch with and embracing one’s emotions
Being deeply loyal to a person, relationship, ideal, or organization
Mood, personality, and impulse control disorders
Drug or alcohol use
Believing on a moral level that one should stand up for what’s right
Having an ingrained sense of responsibility

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Expressing a wide range of emotions
Becoming easily angered, saddened, or excited
Using big, excited gestures
Speaking in a loud voice
Talking incessantly about the object of one’s passion
Working around obstacles to get what one wants
Obsessing about the focus of one’s passion
Standing up for what one believes
Expressing what one feels without thought for propriety or appropriateness
Being confrontational
Involving oneself in social or political activism
Arguing in favor of one’s cause
Aligning with like-minded people
Intense loyalty
Dedicating oneself wholeheartedly to a person or cause
Showing support through the giving of money and time
Remaining loyal despite opposition
Needing to connect with people on a higher level
Taking risks
Stubbornness and determination
Working steadily toward a goal until it has been achieved
Expressing oneself in a creative or meaningful way
Being goal oriented
Courage
Emotional sensitivity
Having a single-minded focus
Researching one’s passion to be as informed as possible
Thinking independently; not being swayed by others
Exhibiting passion in many areas of one’s life
Being self-motivated

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What can I do to make this right?
I can’t believe this is happening. Why can’t people see how wrong this is?
With enough support, we can do something about this.
I hate John so much for what he did to Elise. He’s going to be sorry.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, determination, eagerness, excitement, frustration, hatred, impatience, love, sadness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Passionate characters have a highly developed sense of right and wrong. They make decisions based on these values, to which they have unswerving loyalty. Once they’ve settled on a course of action in regards to their passions, they will stick to it despite obstacles. When opposition does occur, these characters face it head-on and work to figure out ways to continue moving forward. Passion is contagious, energizing others and encouraging them to get on the bandwagon and become excited, too.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Passionate characters are very focused, to the point where they may ignore or minimize other people and ideas. Their dedication to their ideal may make it difficult for them to tolerate others with opposing opinions. Passionate characters feel things deeply, which can make them oversensitive and easily offended. They tend to be demonstrative with their feelings, making others uncomfortable. Because they do act on their emotions, their mood swings may be wide and unpredictable.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:A fitting example of passion in action is the hero of the world’s most famous love story. At his first glimpse of Juliet, Romeo falls head over heels for her. The odds, and most of their family and society, are against the two of them making a match, but because Romeo believes they belong together, he risks everything to gain Juliet’s love.Other Examples from Film:Remy (Ratatouille), John Keating (Dead Poets Society), JoAnne Galloway (A Few Good Men)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cowardly, easygoing, inhibited, nervous, thrifty, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PASSIONATE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living in a culture where it is considered unseemly or unacceptable to express one’s feelings
PLOTLINE: Being faced with having to choose one passion over another
PLOTLINE: Being passionate about someone or something that puts one at odds with family or society
PLOTLINE: Becoming passionate about someone who cannot return the feeling
PLOTLINE: Wanting to avenge oneself but being morally conflicted about doing so
