PATIENT
DEFINITION:exhibiting self-control and composure under trial or strain

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:long-suffering

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Believing that everything will work out in the end
Having an unhurried, easygoing demeanor
Maturity; understanding that it does no good to push or complain
Being other-focused rather than self-focused
Overcoming adversity (poverty, abuse, etc.) and recognizing that success takes time

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Having a laid-back approach to life
Driving carefully; taking one’s time
Speaking in an unrushed, leisurely fashion
Not worrying when things take longer than expected
Calmly waiting (not fidgeting or pacing)
Being able to amuse or entertain oneself while waiting
Not complaining when things are taking too long
Thinking positively instead of focusing on the negative
Enjoying the moment rather than always thinking about what’s coming next
Sleeping well
Not worrying over factors that are out of one’s control
Having the proper perspective about one’s problems
Treating others kindly
Friendliness
Letting others go first (in the checkout line, at a four-way stop, etc.)
Perseverance
Bouncing back quickly from setbacks
Focusing on the end goal with calmness, believing that things will work out eventually
Biding one’s time
Not being surprised by the unexpected
Being able to relax without feeling guilty
Taking time to make decisions
Giving one’s full attention to others
Being content with what one has
Managing one’s time wisely
Passivity; letting things happen instead of doing one’s due diligence
Having faith in people and their ability to eventually do what is right
Having a relaxed mind that doesn’t constantly jump from one thought to the next
Walking at an unhurried pace
Being able to delay gratification; not needing things right this minute
Expressing disappointment at delays but quickly returning to a positive viewpoint
Allowing one’s mind to wander to pass the time
Turning to a different task while waiting on something else

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
This is taking longer than I thought; at least I’m getting a lot done in the meantime.
I’m in no rush.
Worrying won’t make the time go faster.
There must be a reason that Al didn’t get that job.
I’m so blessed; how can I complain about one area of my life that’s not perfect?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, disappointment, gratitude, happiness, hopefulness, peacefulness, resignation, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Patient characters are in no rush. They realize that circumstances may take longer than anticipated, and since worrying and complaining do no good, they choose to take delays in stride. The act of practicing patience requires a plethora of other positive traits: perseverance, contentment, optimism, and peacefulness. In a world where most people suffer from overcommitment, poor time management, and a chronic need to rush, the patient person is a source of well-needed calm.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Sometimes, the patient character can be so easygoing that he has no sense of urgency. This presents a problem when deadlines and teamwork are involved. Patience can easily lead to carelessness and laziness, with the character becoming passive and avoiding any effort to make things happen.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Andy Dufresne (The Shawshank Redemption) is a lesson in patience. It took 19 years for him to chisel his way to freedom with only a succession of tiny rock picks. In the meantime, he took on meaningful projects, like expanding the prison library, mentoring and educating a fellow convict, and filing taxes for the prison employees. Despite many disappointments and a generally horrific existence, he stayed focused and, for the most part, remained positive and confident that he would succeed in the end.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Edmond Dantès (The Count of Monte Cristo), Keyser Söze (The Usual Suspects)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cocky, compulsive, efficient, entitled, extravagant, impatient, impulsive, paranoid, pushy, whiny

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PATIENT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being paired with people who purposely create circumstances that work against one’s goal
PLOTLINE: Having to work within an unforgiving deadline
PLOTLINE: Working in a hurried environment where speed of completion is valued over quality
PLOTLINE: Having to placate those with volatile personalities to keep the peace
PLOTLINE: Working for someone who is demanding or who has unrealistic expectations
