PATRIOTIC
DEFINITION:having love for or loyalty to one’s country

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:nationalistic

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a military family
Being a history buff; having studied one’s country
Fighting in the armed services
Seeing the injustice in other countries and being grateful for where one lives
Escaping a dictatorial country to live in a place of freedom and equality
Being taught the importance of nationalism by one’s family
Being forced to leave a country that one sorely misses
Being brainwashed by one’s government

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Serving in the armed forces
Wearing the country’s colors
Attending parades and rallies
Displaying the nation’s flag
Being loyal to one’s country, people, and founding principles
Making sacrifices for one’s country
Celebrating the country’s holidays
Singing the national anthem
Becoming emotional during political events
Placing others before oneself
Becoming defensive or angry when someone speaks out against one’s country
Deriding the practices of other nations
Teaching one’s children to love their country
Buying goods that were produced in one’s country
Visiting a nation’s historical places
Honoring those who have died in service to the nation
Learning about the nation’s beginnings; studying its roots
Believing that the needs of the many outweigh the needs of a few
Voting
Following the laws
Giving money to support a candidate or party
Holding grudges against past global enemies
Engaging in debates about the nation’s politics and current events
Seeking to silence dissidents
Cheering for national sports teams
Taking an interest in national pastimes
Resisting change to the way things have always been in one’s country
Supporting the protection of the homeland
Worrying about where the country is headed
Expressing grief over how much one’s country has changed
Respecting those in service to the nation (military personnel, police officers, etc.)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
There’s no better place to live on Earth.
I love this country.
If they don’t like it here, they should go live somewhere else!
Look at that guy, sitting down during the national anthem. What a jerk!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, contempt, defensiveness, excitement, love, nostalgia, smugness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Patriotic characters are fiercely loyal, not only to their country, but also to the organizations and people in their lives. Patriotism is a passion of theirs; they educate themselves on the country’s beginnings, study historical figures, learn about the governmental process, and stay informed about current events. Armed with their passion and knowledge, these characters can and will fiercely contend with anyone expressing criticism of the homeland.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:As in the case of any fiercely loyal person, these characters can become blind to their country’s faults. Their intolerance and belligerence in the face of opposition can damage their credibility and reputation. Extreme patriotism can lead a person to harm those who criticize one’s country. Their blind loyalty can make them susceptible to propaganda and may lead them to extreme measures in an attempt to blot out real or perceived enemies.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:As the movieBraveheartaptly shows, living conditions were far from ideal in thirteenth-century Scotland. The serfs were kept under the thumb of their nobles, living in poverty and unable to speak out against injustice. The nobles abused this system through deliberate attempts to subdue the serfs with customs likeius primae noctis, which gave them the right to sleep with any bride on her wedding night. William Wallace’s fierce love for Scotland and what it could be for everyone—not just for the nobles—spurred him to lead an uprising. The result was a bloody and drawn-out war that resulted in Wallace’s own death but also in the birth of a newly emancipated Scotland.Other Examples from Film and Comics:Benjamin Martin (The Patriot), G.I. Joe, Captain America

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cynical, disloyal, flaky, frivolous, greedy, nervous, rebellious, ungrateful, vindictive, whiny

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PATRIOTIC CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Seeing changes to one’s country that challenge one’s loyalty
PLOTLINE: Having to live or work in a country that is ambivalent toward one’s nation of citizenship
PLOTLINE: Discovering that loved ones are secretly and violently opposing one’s country
PLOTLINE: Learning that one’s government is controlling, corrupt, or manipulative
PLOTLINE: Being on the receiving end of injustice that the government refuses to do anything about
