PENSIVE
DEFINITION:musingly thoughtful

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:contemplative, meditative, reflective, speculative, thoughtful

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a mind that tends to wander or daydream
Shyness
Having a brooding or worrying nature
Being interested in issues that require deep thought (politics, religion, social issues, etc.)
Being the kind of person who needs introspection in order to process things
Desiring to escape reality
Being an intellectual

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Staring off into space
Sitting still for long periods of time
Wandering off by oneself
Going for isolated walks or drives
Thinking carefully before speaking
Speaking in circles; talking through one’s thoughts
Multitasking
Showing an appreciation for knowledge and education
Asking a lot of questions
Bringing up heady issues in order to discuss them with others
Valuing other points of view
Expressing annoyance when one’s thought process is interrupted
Becoming frustrated when one is unable to satisfactorily work through a problem
Being easily bored by topics that aren’t of interest
Going long periods of time without engaging with others
Seeking out knowledgeable people with whom to discuss issues
Being easily distracted
Reading and researching to further one’s perspective
Forgetting appointments and meetings
Taking a job that doesn’t require much thought so one can live inside one’s head
Losing the thread of conversations
Taking notes or keeping journals to keep track of one’s thoughts and ideas
Being reclusive
Getting overdue notices because one has forgotten to pay bills
Letting one’s untended yard go to seed
Becoming stiff from sitting in one position for too long while processing ideas
Forgetting run-of-the-mill activities (eating, showering, feeding the dog, etc.)
Difficulty interacting with people if one has been introspective for too long
Insulting others by not being able to pay attention when they’re speaking
Losing track of time
Blurting out thoughts that have nothing to do with the current conversation
Playing devil’s advocate in an effort to see things from another viewpoint
Adding to a conversation only to discover that the topic has changed

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
That’s an idea that deserves serious thought.
Good grief. Is it midnight already?
What an interesting question. There are innumerable possibilities…
If the politicians thought more and fought less, they’d come up with better solutions.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, amusement, annoyance, curiosity, eagerness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Pensive characters are big thinkers. They like to ponder issues, and as such, are likely to come up with innovative answers. They’re not daunted by seeming impossibilities but tackle them directly in their own quiet and thoughtful way. So much time spent in deep thought leads to a naturally philosophical attitude, well-formed opinions, and an interest in an array of topics.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Pensive characters tend to live in their own heads; as such, they can turn reclusive and lose touch with what’s happening around them. Their inward focus may make it difficult for them to pay attention and listen; this can lead people to perceive them as arrogant, dismissive, or rude. Some pensive characters may actively avoid others, being more comfortable with their thoughts than with people, which could add to their difficulty forming meaningful relationships.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Ponyboy Curtis (The Outsiders)isn’t like most of the other greasers in his neighborhood. Unlike his thuggish counterparts, he likes to read and watch movies and think about things. Instead of hanging out with the gang and rumbling, he prefers to be alone, thinking about the characters he’s seen on screen or the stories he’s read. He’s perfectly happy living in his head, which makes him kind of an oddball among his peers.Other Examples from Literature and TV:Jonas (The Giver), Wilson (Home Improvement)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:courteous, frivolous, ignorant, playful, scatterbrained, suspicious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PENSIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Developing a mental handicap that affects one’s ability to focus or analyze
PLOTLINE: Facing distractions that make it difficult to spend prolonged time in thought
PLOTLINE: Teaming up with someone whose traits (chattiness, etc.) make focused thought difficult
PLOTLINE: Working in an environment where logical thought isn’t common or valued
PLOTLINE: Being forced to speak on an issue before one has had time to consider it
