PERCEPTIVE
DEFINITION:showing intuitive observation and insight

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:discerning, insightful, intuitive

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a “sixth sense” that enables one to notice or feel things that others don’t
Being deeply attuned to others
Being highly empathetic
Being attuned to patterns and other data that enables one to make accurate predictions

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Accurately assessing what one is observing
Making predictions based on incoming data
Noticing things that other people don’t see
Making connections that other people miss
Noticing changes and patterns
Reading people well
Predicting outcomes that seem outrageous but turn out to be correct
Sensing that something is wrong
Having highly attuned senses
Being compelled to share the truth even when it makes things difficult
Sharing knowledge in the hopes that others will be warned or danger will be averted
Expressing confidence, pride, or haughtiness at one’s ability to see what others don’t
Quickly assessing problems
Finding solutions
Seeing solutions as black-and-white
Being able to read people’s moods
Gleaning a great deal of information from a short period of time spent observing
Caring about others
Being observant
Knowing oneself accurately and intimately
Gaining insight into others by observing actions or seeing their possessions
Expressing frustration when one’s perceptions are brushed off or dismissed
Evaluating people on a number of levels (analyzing behaviors, emotions, motives, etc.)
Being logical yet having good intuition
Being good with people by reading them while interacting
Picking up on secrets without necessarily meaning to
Being able to put oneself in another’s shoes
Seeing how things fit together in a bigger picture
Preparing for the future, even when others are not
Proactively making changes to protect oneself and loved ones
Quickly and accurately sizing up a situation

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Am I the only one seeing this?
I have to tell them what’s coming.
I don’t like the way he phrased this on his résumé. Sounds fishy to me.
Alice has a thing for Barry? And look, he’s clueless about it. This should be interesting.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, eagerness, elation, frustration, impatience, reluctance, smugness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Perceptive characters are beneficial in that they have great observation skills, are able to accurately assess what they’re observing, and can put the pieces together to see what’s coming down the road. Astute problem solvers, they quickly and easily arrive at solutions. This helpful capability isn’t all that common, and as such, is an enviable trait.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Perceptive characters can become impatient when others miss what they so obviously see. This impatience can lead to scorn and disdain, which doesn’t endear them to others. Sometimes, although their predictions or solutions might make sense, people reject both the information and the messenger out of fear or anxiety. Despite their insight, these characters have blind spots like anyone else and may not be able to easily see and solve their own problems. Others may also become embarrassed or mistrustful when they realize the perceptive character has caught on to their secrets.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:As the runt of the litter, Fiver (Watership Down) is small and timid. But he also bears a gift for reading his environment and knowing when something is wrong. Due to his perception, Fiver predicts that disaster is coming to his warren and he’s able to save a handful of his mates. His intuition also warns him of danger along their journey to find a new home. Although his fellow travelers at first are put off by his strangeness, they eventually come to respect his insight and rely on his input.Other Examples from Film, Literature, and TV:Dick Hallorann (The Shining), the precogs (Minority Report), Sherlock Holmes, Patrick Jane (The Mentalist)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:flaky, hostile, inattentive, indecisive, paranoid, private, sensitive, shy, superstitious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PERCEPTIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being able to put pieces together but lacking the attentiveness to notice the pieces to begin with
PLOTLINE: Perceiving negative outcomes that no one will accept or want to hear
PLOTLINE: Living in a deceptive environment where it’s difficult to accurately assess what’s going on
PLOTLINE: Interacting with other perceptive people and wondering if they can be trusted
