PERSUASIVE
DEFINITION:able to influence others by argument, entreaty, counsel, or protest

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:compelling, convincing, eloquent, influential

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being naturally charismatic
Being passionate about a certain subject
Confidence
Desiring to enlighten or educate others
Having a knack for reading people and influencing them
Knowing how to speak, write, or otherwise present matter in the most appealing way

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being charming
Inspiring trust in others
Instinctively knowing the right thing to say
Paying close attention to others
Being a charismatic speaker
Listening actively
Reading others well
Carefully tailoring one’s approach to the audience
Being confident
Having a reputation as someone who knows one’s stuff
Being passionate
Showing vulnerability in order to gain empathy
Persuading others through results; doing what one says one will accomplish
Knowing what concerns people care about and having answers ready
Showing extreme dedication to one’s cause
Being diplomatic
Staying focused on the end result
Relating to people; finding common ground
Sticking to one’s beliefs
Saying the same thing in many different ways
Using different methods to persuade different kinds of people
Speaking and acting with authority and confidence
Voicing one’s opinion as fact
Remaining calm in the face of opposition
Expressing empathy for others
Using humor to disarm others and put them at ease
Anticipating objections and providing solutions that address concerns
Viewing opposition as an opportunity to win someone over
Being a skilled debater
Speaking of one’s weaknesses so they look like strengths
Studying the art of persuasion
Thanking people for listening and weighing in
Showing respect for others
Treating each concern seriously
Promising to follow up or look into areas one was unable to address
Encouraging people to have an open mind
Proving credibility through one’s knowledge rather than citing one’s résumé

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
How can I win this guy over?
What’s the best approach with this group?
I’m right about this; now I just have to convince everyone else.
If I emphasize the positives, they’ll forget about the negatives.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, excitement

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Persuasive characters are passionate. It is often their zeal and devotion, as much as their eloquence, that convinces people to jump on the bandwagon. Characters with the gift of persuasion are charismatic and charming, drawing others to themselves. Their successes often occur due to their ability to read people and relate to different people groups. This trait can enable these characters to elicit change and make a difference in their communities and the world at large.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Persuasive characters are charming. Due to the ease with which they read people, it can be easy for them to slip into a manipulative role, telling others what they want to hear and faking concern in an effort to win them over. Because of their passion and the belief that their cause is just, they can also become frustrated or angry when people don’t come around to their way of thinking.

EXAMPLE FROM HISTORY:Many words have been used to describe Winston Churchill, but most would agree thatpersuasiveis entirely appropriate. He was a student of rhetoric and public speaking. His speeches were motivational, inspirational, and carefully crafted weapons of persuasion, winning over a lukewarm parliament and encouraging his people to never give up hope, even in the midst of defeat. To this day, he is believed to be a master of persuasive speaking, and his techniques are studied by those wishing to motivate and inspire others.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Sherlock Holmes, Harvey Dent (The Dark Knight), Dr. King Schultz (Django Unchained)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:confrontational, disrespectful, intolerant, pretentious, sleazy, stubborn, timid

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PERSUASIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having to persuade others about something that goes against one’s moral code
PLOTLINE: Having to choose whether or not to use immoral means to persuade one’s audience
PLOTLINE: Facing an actively hostile audience
PLOTLINE: Being reluctantly persuasive; being good at influencing but not wanting a leadership role
