PHILOSOPHICAL
DEFINITION:inclined to the reflective study of beliefs, attitudes, values, and concepts connected with our existence; deep-thinking

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:deep

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being highly intelligent
Having a love of wisdom
A desire for enlightenment and truth
Growing up in a family of scholars

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being widely read and educated
Seeking out higher education
Educating oneself on history and other cultures
Researching the evolution of mythology or religious beliefs
Sitting in deep thought
Having an inward focus; losing track of conversations or peripheral events
Asking deep questions
Watching documentaries
Seeking answers to the big questions about God, morality, life and death, etc.
Learning a second language that aids in one’s studies (Latin, etc.)
Having a large collection of books pertaining to subjects of philosophical interest
Seeking out experts in an effort to learn more
Being inwardly reflective and interested in knowing why we exist
Being preoccupied with one’s thoughts rather than what’s happening externally
Overanalyzing
Being highly logical
Isolation
Questioning everything
Taking a long time to express an opinion; being unable to give a quick answer
Feeling like life is passing too quickly or things are happening too fast
Ascribing to highbrow humor
Difficulty making superficial small talk
Being impatient with illogical people
Continually making comparisons and evaluating
Thinking obsessively
Writing and journaling
Reading books in a foreign language
Socializing with other intellectuals
Categorizing
Having a diverse and complex vocabulary
Showing frustration at interruptions when one is lost in thought
Having a difficult time relating to less cerebral people

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What is real? What is truth?
What is my purpose?
How can I evolve?
Is free will an illusion?
What happens after death, and is there a God?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, conflicted, curiosity, depression, desire, frustration. hopefulness, loneliness, overwhelmed, uncertainty

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Philosophical characters read deeply into situations and aren’t afraid of intellectual heavy lifting in order to find answers. Well-educated and thoughtful, when they share what is on their minds, they can provoke curiosity in others and encourage them to probe harder to resolve their own unanswered questions. These characters have a lot of wisdom, and while they won’t dole it out quickly, they are excellent sounding boards for friends or family who need to work through problems.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters can sometimes find themselves alienated from life itself, for as they quest for answers, they can forget to experience the world firsthand. Friends and family may view them as silent, brooding types, or feel that they overthink everything. Philosophical characters can have hobbies that most people don’t get or aren’t interested in, and they tend to have fewer relationships because of the importance solitude plays in puzzling out life’s big mysteries. They can also be long-winded when imparting ideas, causing impatience or boredom.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Wilson, the wise yet odd neighbor to Tim Taylor inHome Improvement, is a storehouse of interesting facts and deep insight. Whenever Tim is wrestling with relationships or difficult decisions, Wilson peeks over the fence to provide his own philosophical views on the subject. Often he asks a thought-provoking question or two to steer Tim toward an epiphany.Other Examples from Literature and TV:Hamlet (The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark), Spock (Star Trekseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:decisive, frivolous, inflexible, irrational, melodramatic, obedient, paranoid, playful, scatterbrained, worrywart

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PHILOSOPHICAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a debilitating mental disability that makes logic and linear thinking difficult
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s life work of journals, study materials, or computer files to a disaster
PLOTLINE: Educating oneself on a belief only for new information to surface and prove it inaccurate
PLOTLINE: Discovering something about oneself that leads to feelings of shame or disappointment
