PLAYFUL
DEFINITION:fond of playing and fun

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:coltish, frisky, frolicsome, fun-loving

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Immaturity
Wanting to have fun
Having a short attention span
A desire to avoid work, responsibility, conflict, etc.
Laziness

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Laughing often
Using fidgety, impatient movements
Teasing, cajoling, or making jokes
Turning work into a game
Mimicking others in an effort to lighten a serious mood
Encouraging others to sneak out of work to have fun
Enjoying adventure
Procrastinating on work projects
Not giving one’s all when it comes to work
Turning a mundane object into a toy
Speaking in a loud voice
Focusing on the here and now
Not thinking too far ahead
Being open-minded
Acting spontaneously
Collecting action figures or toys and displaying them around one’s workspace
Being silly
Dressing colorfully or with flair
Running instead of walking
Standing instead of sitting
Doing anything to get a laugh
Speaking without thinking
Avoiding serious activities (meetings, boring family dinners, etc.)
Acting impulsively
Creating ditties and rhymes that get everyone laughing
Watching and playing sports
Choosing fun with friends over quiet time at home
Competitiveness for fun
Being easily bored
Making do with what one has
Laziness
Irresponsibility
Being passionate about one’s hobbies or interests
Focusing on the positive and ignoring unpleasantness

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Is it Friday yet?
This is BORING!
I wish I didn’t have to work today.
How can we make this fun?
Bob is such a killjoy. Dude, lighten up!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, curiosity, denial, excitement, happiness, hopefulness, impatience

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Playful characters are always looking for a good time. They make even the most boring and uninspiring projects fun, so people like to have them around. Unlike mischievous people, playful characters have good intentions and don’t willfully hurt others or make them uncomfortable. Childlike in attitude, these characters love to laugh, naturally lifting the spirits of those around them.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because of their pursuit of fun, playful characters often have a hard time buckling down and getting to work. They can be lazy, prone to procrastination, and may not give 100% to a project. These tendencies may not endear them to peers with a high sense of responsibility, and they can rub serious people the wrong way. Their lighthearted attitudes may convince others that playful characters can’t be trusted with important projects, which may keep them from progressing in their careers.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Josh Baskin (Big) may look like an adult but he’s actually just a kid. As such, he gravitates towards toys and games. He enjoys being with friends and having fun. His approach to work involves curiosity and play. Oblivious to verbal sparring and office politics in the workplace, his easygoing attitude is refreshing and even inspiring to his co-workers.Other Examples from Film:Fraulein Maria (The Sound of Music), Tommy Callahan III (Tommy Boy)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:cruel, demanding, efficient, fussy, inflexible, pensive, perfectionist, resentful, studious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PLAYFUL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being surrounded by somber, work-minded people
PLOTLINE: Unwittingly contributing (through one’s playfulness) to a serious problem for a loved one
PLOTLINE: Being forced to find the balance between playfulness and responsibility
PLOTLINE: Having to take charge of an important project that has far-reaching effects
