PROACTIVE
DEFINITION:thinking and acting ahead; anticipating difficulties or challenges that bring about change

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:farsighted, forward-thinking, strategic

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being goal-oriented and achievement-focused
Needing to be prepared
Extreme worry or paranoia
Constantly being threatened or in danger
Having a strong sense of responsibility
Growing up in a well-prepared family (survivalists, doomsday preppers, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Thinking before acting
Being a rational thinker
Having strong foresight; being able to see how things are connected
Broad-mindedness; seeing the forest for the trees
Researching and investigating a problem from all angles
Testing a solution before putting it into play
Being a planner
Watchfulness; looking for early indicators of change so one can counteract
Crowd sourcing for information; relying on teamwork
Creating checklists and questions that need answering
Thinking of the worst-case scenario so one can test out ideas
Prioritizing well
Taking one’s time rather than rushing
Being able to think on one’s feet
Having a strong gut instinct
Asking people how one can do something better for next time
Being hardworking and thorough
Taking advantage of opportunities
Learning skills and furthering one’s education to become more proficient
Doing things without being asked
Being highly observant
Seeing what needs to be done and doing it
Being ready and prepared for any situation
Paying close attention to the emotions of others
Speaking up when needed
Never hesitating to take the lead
Spotting possible danger
Thinking about the weather, travel plans, and what might go wrong before setting out
Reliability
Not relying on luck
Identifying what is holding one back and taking action to overcome it
Asking others what they need and want
Remaining calm in intense situations
Taking responsibility for one’s actions
Confidence
Rising to the challenge
Generosity
Organization
Asking for help when one needs it
Always having a purpose

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Ben is behind on reports. While he’s finishing last month’s numbers, I’ll start entering this month’s.
If I mow the lawn without Dad having to ask, maybe he’ll let me borrow the car this weekend.
That tire looks low. I should get it checked before we leave on our trip.
Lorna looks ready to murder Alana. I don’t know what happened, but I better head this off.
Tim’s such a great speaker. I’ll ask him for tips before my next presentation.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, confidence, curiosity, determination, satisfaction, wariness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Proactive characters think ahead, prepare, and then act, thereby taking control of their own destinies. Because they are always seeking to improve, they are often successful in business and make good leaders. These characters look at the big picture rather than only focusing on their immediate interests. By taking care of problems before they occur, they can spend more time doing activities that they find important instead of dealing with the fallout that comes from a lack of preparation and foresight.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because proactive characters can usually predict trouble and avoid it in advance, they have a hard time with people who can’t do the same. They tend to unfairly judge family, friends, or co-workers who procrastinate, viewing them as lazy for not being as on top of things as they themselves are. Their high standards and expectations don’t differentiate between work and home; this can strain relationships, especially when priorities differ.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:When Randy Bragg (Alas Babylon) covertly learns of an impending nuclear war, he takes survival into his own hands and springs into action. Although unable to stop the coming apocalypse, he acts quickly and decisively. By securing cash, stocking up on groceries and water, and hoarding gasoline, he is able to save his family.Other Examples from Film:Colonel Sam Daniels (Outbreak), David Levinson (Independence Day)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:calm, controlling, demanding, easygoing, flaky, frivolous, irrational, lazy, melodramatic, pompous, sensitive, unruly

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PROACTIVE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working for a boss whose knee-jerk responses lead to shifting goals and priorities
PLOTLINE: Having insufficient resources that make it difficult to proactively get ahead
PLOTLINE: Wanting to act but not having enough knowledge or information to do so
PLOTLINE: Facing opposition in the form of an administration that doesn’t trust one’s instincts
