PROFESSIONAL
DEFINITION:exhibiting specialized knowledge and applying it with courtesy and good judgment

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive, moral

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having successful, career-focused parents
Having earned a higher education
Feeling validated through one’s business savvy, knowledge, or educated skill set
Being career- and success-focused
Having a desire to lead; being ambitious
Maturity
Confidence and high self-esteem
Being highly ethical

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being a strong team player
Having the education and knowledge required to be proficient at one’s job
Being experienced in a specific field of work
Reliability, trustworthiness and honesty
Having strong people skills
Objectivity
Working well under pressure
Having a strong command of language and being able to articulate oneself well
Adaptability
Keeping one’s promises
Maintaining control over one’s emotions
Being proactive
Thinking before acting
Treating others with respect and courtesy
Being a strong listener
Assessing the politics of a situation and acting accordingly
Using good hygiene
Being well dressed
Acting appropriately for the situation
Having a high stress tolerance
Being able to prioritize
Politeness
Following through on commitments; providing what people need
Removing one’s personal feelings from the equation
Dealing with disappointments and moving on
Using good judgment, especially in volatile situations
Taking responsibility for one’s mistakes
Being organized and prompt
Supporting others so they can succeed
Positivity
Watching for opportunities or threats and bringing them to the attention of leaders
Being an advocate for oneself and for others
Having a good reputation with one’s peers
Offering encouragement, not discouragement; being “glass half full”

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
The meeting is on Monday, so that gives me two days to prepare.
Eric’s been through a lot lately, so I’ll let his sarcastic comment go.
When will Rick understand that spreading rumors makes people lose respect for him?
Firing Sadie will cause friction, but it’s necessary. I’ll handle this as discreetly as possible.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, eagerness, frustration, hopefulness, satisfaction, skepticism

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Characters who behave professionally are hardworking, loyal, ethical, and highly objective. They manage well under stress and can remove their emotions when making decisions, allowing them to make choices that are unbiased and best for the situation. Others tend to look up to and admire professionals, viewing them as trustworthy and capable of sound judgment.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Professionals are often held to a higher standard than other people, meaning that their transgressions are more noticeable. Because of their professionalism, if they are caught doing something embarrassing or unseemly, they are judged harshly for it. Bad decisions can haunt them, hampering their careers and casting doubt on their trustworthiness. These characters will have to work twice as hard as others to win back trust and esteem. Jealous co-workers, friends, or neighbors may jump on opportunities to bring them down a peg or two, hoping to prove that professional characters are as fallible as everyone else.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Clarice Starling, an FBI trainee inThe Silence of the Lambs, is well-educated, highly trained, and determined to win Hannibal Lecter’s trust. Although unnerved by Lecter’s cannibalistic past and psychological insight, she remains professional, controlling her strained emotions while negotiating conditions for his help. Her bravery and tenacity win Lector’s admiration; in reward, he provides leads for her to follow—as long as she is willing to probe her past wounds for his enjoyment.Other Examples from Film and Pop Culture:JoAnne Galloway (A Few Good Men), J.C. Wiatt (Baby Boom), Donald Trump

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:bitter, cowardly, flaky, greedy, indecisive, irresponsible, jealous, lazy, unethical, unreliable, vindictive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PROFESSIONAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working for a new, inept boss who inherits his position of power rather than earning it
PLOTLINE: Serving an organization that is unethical or corrupt
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a personal downfall or tragedy that cripples one professionally
PLOTLINE: Seeing an opportunity for success if one is willing to bend the rules or set aside ethics
PLOTLINE: Being told to look the other way if one wishes to keep one’s job
PLOTLINE: Being falsely accused of corruption by a jealous, unscrupulous competitor
