PROPER
DEFINITION:marked by appropriateness and correctness; stately

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:decorous, dignified, formal

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Regional influences
Monetary status
Parental expectations
A desire to do the right thing
Not wanting to offend
Snootiness
Insecurity
Coming from a strict rule-following background

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being keenly aware of what others think
Following rules
Keeping a tidy home
Not leaving the house unless one’s appearance is perfect
Speaking with proper grammar
Using a controlled voice (a soft tone, appropriate volume, etc.)
Not showing emotion in public
Loyalty
Creating many rules to keep others in line
Adhering to societal norms
Having high expectations for oneself and for others
Expressing disdain when others do things that are considered tacky
Belonging to prestigious groups or societies
Social climbing
Being strict with one’s children to keep them from being an embarrassment
Adhering to a schedule or routine
Having good posture
Being meticulous about certain things
Having good hygiene
Taking one’s responsibilities seriously
Being involved in the community
Supporting charities
Judging others based on how proper or improper they are
Responding to negativity with dignity
Avoiding conflict
Not liking surprises
Not doing anything that will make others feel uncomfortable
Doing anything to avoid a scene
Maintaining the status quo
Refusing to be drawn into arguments or disagreements in public
Avoiding public affection unless the gesture is socially acceptable (air kisses, etc.)
Thinking before one speaks
Having impeccable manners
Showing gratitude to one’s host or hostess, even if one cannot stand them
Difficulty relaxing and letting go of propriety

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What’s the proper thing to do in this situation?
What will the neighbors think?
Why does Barbara always have to make a scene?
I know Ian thinks he’s doing the right thing, but can’t he be more subtle about it?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, annoyance, disappointment, disgust, embarrassment, scorn

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Proper characters are polite, upstanding citizens who don’t intentionally cause trouble within societal norms. They respect authority, and since they can be counted on to toe the company line, they make excellent yes-men. These characters are extremely loyal, sticking to a person, group, philosophy, or belief to the bitter end.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Proper characters are comfortable with the way things have always been and don’t respond well to change. They are often close-minded and stick to their guns even when they’re wrong. Because morals and rightness are often handed down through ancient tradition or a chain of command, proper characters rely on others to tell them what is right and don’t often think for themselves. Because they value propriety, they can be disdainful of those who behave inappropriately.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Aunt Alexandra (To Kill a Mockingbird) is a genteel southern lady with pristine manners and a flawless appearance. She hosts society parties, bakes her own refreshments, and takes great pride in her family heritage. Although she disagrees with some of the choices her brother Atticus is making, her sense of propriety keeps her loyal to him and provides Jem and Scout with a decorous, albeit strict, caregiver.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Mary Poppins (Mary Poppins), Queen Elizabeth II (The Queen)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:confrontational, curious, disorganized, lazy, melodramatic, mischievous, reckless, rowdy, uncouth

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE PROPER CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being proper while having a compulsion for a disgusting or inappropriate habit
PLOTLINE: Being teamed with uncouth, improper characters
PLOTLINE: Lacking the resources to maintain an appropriate lifestyle
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a crisis in which society plummets into survival mode, making propriety a luxury
