QUIRKY
DEFINITION:exhibiting peculiarities or idiosyncrasies

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:eccentric, offbeat, peculiar, unconventional, unusual

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Entitlement; believing that one has earned the right to act however one wants
Being unconcerned with what others think
A desire to break free from an overly strict or regimented past
Growing up in an environment that held little respect for conventionality
Dementia
Immaturity
Insecurity
Craving attention
Having an independent streak; taking pride in one’s individuality

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Wearing unconventional clothing combinations
Not caring about one’s appearance; being more interested in other things
Exhibiting peculiar habits
Not picking up on common social cues from others
Relating somewhat awkwardly to others
Embracing one’s weirdness
Doing things to deliberately stand out
Doing what one wants without worrying about what others think
Flouting the rules
Making up one’s own rules
Unpredictability
Confidence
Independence
Being amused when others are discomfited by one’s uniqueness
Sticking to one’s individuality despite opposition
Being open-minded
Enjoying life
Doing even mundane tasks a little differently than others
Defying the norm
Being annoyed when others follow trends and jump on popular bandwagons
Espousing beliefs and opinions that are different from the mainstream
Becoming defensive when one’s individuality is criticized
Anger that escalates to bitterness, turning one’s quirkiness into an act of defiance
Speaking in a straightforward manner; not mincing words
Isolation
Grouping with other quirky people
Expressing creativity
Adopting quirky habits in an attempt to gain attention or acceptance
Transparency; being true to oneself without worrying about the perceptions of others
Unnerving others with one’s odd ways, ideas, and unpredictability

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Most people wouldn’t put these clothes together, but I think they look awesome!
I don’t know why everyone liked Avatar so much. I thought it was dumb.
I wonder if I can walk from Central Park to Riverside Boulevard backward.
Today, I’m not going to speak. Instead, I will sing.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, anger, anxiety, confidence, defensiveness, determination, embarrassment, indifference, satisfaction, wariness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Once quirky characters have been labeled as peculiar, no one expects them to act conventionally, so they can get away with things that others can’t, which is a nice little tool for the writer’s arsenal. Because they are easily stereotyped, they are often underestimated or overlooked by society at large. Their tendency to think outside the box enables them to see problems from a different angle and come up with unusual solutions.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:While everyone has something to offer, the gifts of a quirky person are not often sought out or graciously received. These characters are easily misunderstood and viewed with suspicion, making them convenient scapegoats. Their strangeness usually ensures that they live on the outskirts of community and fellowship.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Willy Wonka (Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory) is a fairly weird proprietor. His clothes are outlandish, he employs a crew of Oompa-Loompas, and it’s common practice for children to disappear or be otherwise disfigured while touring his factory. Through his words and his actions, it’s clear that he lives outside of society’s norms and does so with complete confidence. And because he’s known as a quirky guy, people take it all in stride.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Spike (Notting Hill), Tish Ambrosé (SpaceCamp)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:diplomatic, fussy, inhibited, proper, responsible, sophisticated

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE QUIRKY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living in a strict society with zero tolerance for individuality
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a situation where one has to conform in order to achieve one’s goals
PLOTLINE: Being misunderstood or wrongly judged due to one’s quirkiness
PLOTLINE: Having a goal that conflicts with one’s offbeat nature (wanting to be popular, etc.)
