RESOURCEFUL
DEFINITION:capable of adapting to new situations by making do with what one has

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:clever, enterprising, ingenious

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Experiencing a shortness of resources in the past
Being impoverished; having no other choice but to figure out new ways of surviving
A desire to live simply
Frugality or thriftiness
Independence; not wanting to rely on others
A desire to be more responsible or efficient with one’s resources
Being highly imaginative or creative

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Keeping cool in the face of difficult circumstances
Being proactive
Being a good problem solver
Assessing a situation quickly and accurately
Determination
Maintaining a positive outlook
Believing that there are always solutions if one just looks hard enough
Having a basic understanding of how things work
Taking pride in one’s ability to care for oneself
Tinkering with things to better understand how they work
Thinking outside the box; ingenuity
Recycling
Repurposing discarded objects into something new and useful
Holding onto items because they might one day come in handy
Hoarding tendencies
Acquiring what one needs in a creative way
Making items instead of buying them (clothes, food products, home decor, etc.)
Keeping inventory of the items at one’s disposal
Thinking ahead
Bartering or trading with others for what can’t be produced
Educating oneself on areas where knowledge is lacking
Recognizing that there isn’t only one solution to a given problem
Keeping an eye out for new opportunities
Being organized
Looking for ways to cut costs or save money
Having a backup plan
Viewing a tight budget as a challenge
Anticipating problems before they arise
Taking risks; not being afraid to experiment
Learning from one’s mistakes
Believing that nothing is impossible
Scorning people who are wasteful or extravagant
Becoming obsessive about saving money or resources
Being a fixer who is unafraid of hard work

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I can’t believe Marie threw this bottle away when there’s still shampoo in the bottom.
If I think long enough, I’ll figure out a solution.
It would be a shame to throw out this cracked cutting board. How else could I use it?
What resources do we have at our disposal?

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:annoyance, confidence, curiosity, desperation, determination, eagerness, pride, satisfaction, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Resourceful characters are forward-thinking. They’re able to anticipate problems and begin planning in advance. When a difficult situation does arise, the resourceful character keeps his head; instead of panicking, he chooses to focus on finding a solution to the problem—usually in the form of something unorthodox or unconventional. Determined, confident, and imaginative, the resourceful character is a handy individual to have around when everything goes south.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because of their ability to work independently, resourceful characters can have difficulty depending on or working with others. Their need for self-sufficiency can lead to isolation and even paranoia as they worry about other people wanting to take away their resources or freedom. These characters can also become too frugal, choosing to live in poverty and squalor rather than part with their money or resources.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:InThe Boxcar Children, four young siblings are forced to live on their own in an abandoned train car. To survive, they do what they have to do. The eldest gets a modest job doing lawn work. The others comb the dump to find serviceable items that can be washed and repurposed. They even dam the local lake to create a bathing area and a cool place to keep their milk from spoiling. Although young, the Alden children are able to make do by using the items at their disposal and keeping their eyes open for new opportunities to better their situation.Other Examples from Film and Literature:John Rambo (First Blood), William and Elizabeth (The Swiss Family Robinson), Philippe the Mouse (Ladyhawke)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:entitled, extravagant, generous, haughty, irresponsible, lazy, selfish, subservient

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE RESOURCEFUL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having to be resourceful while lacking creativity or imagination
PLOTLINE: Being paired with people who are extravagant and wasteful
PLOTLINE: Facing a hindrance that makes resourcefulness difficult (an injury that affects mobility, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having to be resourceful not just for oneself, but for a large number of needy dependents
