RESPONSIBLE
DEFINITION:being accountable for one’s actions and obligations

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:accountable, dependable, reliable, trustworthy

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being the first-born
Growing up as a caregiver for younger siblings or debilitated parents
Facing a situation in the past where survival depended on one’s ability to care for oneself
Having an acute sense of right and wrong
Gratitude that compels one to take care of others
Having a patriotic sense of family, community, and country
Growing up in an environment of strict rules and expectations
Belonging to a family with built-in obligations (a family that runs its own business, etc.)
The belief that people should be held accountable for their actions

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Having a solid work ethic
Keeping promises
Doing one’s job to the best of one’s ability
Taking pride in one’s work
Finishing projects in a timely manner
Looking out for the people in one’s charge
Taking on extra duties in order to make ends meet
Accepting responsibility when mistakes are made
Not making excuses
Feeling remorse, regret, or guilt when one’s choices have let someone else down
Experiencing anxiety when complications make it difficult to fulfill one’s obligations
Taking pride in one’s reputation; striving to uphold it
Relating to people in a respectful manner
Knowing one’s strengths and weaknesses and working within and around them
Self-discipline
Facing difficult circumstances head-on
Being organized
Learning from one’s mistakes
Taking initiative
Feeling overwhelmed at times
Viewing one’s circumstances honestly and objectively
Treating people fairly
Expressing frustration when others don’t follow through on their responsibilities
Picking up the slack when someone drops the ball and feeling resentment as a result
Following through, even when faced with unforeseen circumstances
Sacrificing to make sure one’s responsibilities are met
Taking the lead in a group situation
Working within deadlines
Being intrinsically motivated
Telling one’s charges what they want to hear to spare them anxiety
Finding it difficult to ask for help out of a reluctance to appear weak
Following up after the fact to make sure that others are satisfied
Feeling proud for following through as promised

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I don’t know how I’m going to get this done, but I’ll make it work.
Why can’t people just do what they say they’re going to do?
This is a good opportunity but I simply don’t have time. I’ll tell them to ask someone else.
I’ll need to get up an hour earlier than usual if I’m going to get to the meeting on time.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, anxiety, confidence, determination, overwhelmed, resentment, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:When the chips are down, responsible characters are the go-to people. They are trustworthy and work hard to provide what’s needed. This trait is strongly tied to morality, so no matter what else is going on, responsible characters will do what needs to be done in order to satisfy obligations. These characters will make sacrifices and put others before themselves if it is for the greater good. They are loyal to those within their circle, be it family, friends, a community, or the company they work for. Because they can be relied on to take their commitments seriously, they make ideal leaders, caregivers, and mates.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with this trait take their responsibilities so seriously that it can be difficult for them to let go and have fun. Guiding, parenting, and moralizing is sometimes done without thought. This kind of involvement is not always appreciated by others, and responsible characters can find themselves excluded or even vilified by people looking to stretch boundaries and find their own way. Younger people especially may perceive others with this trait as being boring and overly serious, not seeing their value until trouble arises and help is needed.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:InSaving Private Ryan, Captain John Miller has a duty to fulfill—one that he doesn’t particularly believe in. But as an army captain, it’s his responsibility to locate Private Ryan and send him home. The difficulties are seemingly insurmountable: Ryan’s whereabouts are unknown, France is literally crawling with enemy soldiers, and most of Miller’s company are not on board, to the point of attempting a mutiny after two of their members are killed. Through it all, Captain Miller not only holds to his duty but encourages his team to do the same. In the end, he completes his mission, and pays the ultimate price to do so.Other Examples from Literature:Frodo Baggins (The Lord of the Rings), Martin Brody (Jaws)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:flaky, impulsive, irresponsible, lazy, mischievous, quirky, reckless, selfish, uncooperative, uninhibited

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE RESPONSIBLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having goals that conflict with one’s morals (being a responsible thief, a dishonest parent, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having conflicting responsibilities that necessitate difficult choices
PLOTLINE: Having a compulsion or bad habit that makes it difficult to be responsible
PLOTLINE: Being responsible for a project or objective that one doesn’t believe in
