SELF-LOATHING
DEFINITION:Intense dislike or even hatred for oneself

NOTES:Self-loathing can manifest through seemingly contrasting behaviors. Some characters may seem guilt-ridden and deserving of pain, while others act aggressively to mask their feelings of self-hatred and low worth.

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
Crying or often being on the verge of tears
Apologizing for failures and mistakes
Trying too hard to please
Looking to others for reassurance:Is this right?orShould I do this?
Having impossible expectations for oneself
Accepting punishments without question
Scrutinizing flaws (grabbing at a non-existent roll of fat, obsessing over pimples, etc.)
Believing the cruel words of others
Feeling guilt at experiencing pleasure or a happy moment
Walking with one’s head down
Doing small things that hurt (scratching one’s arm, pinching, digging a nail into one’s flesh, etc.)
Self-sabotage (talking too much but being unable to stop, telling lies no one believes, etc.)
Slumped posture
Keeping one’s arms tight to the sides, not taking up space
Avoiding social situations
Keeping a wide personal space barrier
Adhering to a routine
Dismissing compliments:Someone else would have done a better job, orAre you kidding? My project looks terrible!
Seeking out negative attention (e.g., drinking too much)
Being unresponsive or speaking very little
Wearing clothing that is unflattering or attracts the wrong sort of attention
Gesturing without energy (e.g., nodding toward something rather than pointing at it)
Verbalizing one’s flaws:I break anything I touch, orIf I try and fix your hair I’ll just ruin it.
An absence of smiles and facial expressions
Taking stupid risks in the hopes of being caught and punished
Adopting destructive habits such as pill popping, smoking, or drinking
Choosing friendships with negative people (who engage in mean gossip, bullying, etc.)
Being argumentative
Avoiding being touched
Using sarcasm to hurt others and keep them away

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Body aches and a feeling of heaviness
Fatigue
An upset stomach
Normal pains that one ignores (believing that the pain is deserved)

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Negative thoughts:I’m so stupid, orI mess everything up.
Envying others, then feeling guilt for wanting what they have
Constant self-critical assessments:I can’t wear this shirt. Look at my scrawny arms!
Desiring connection but feeling unworthy:Who am I kidding? She wouldn’t look twice at me.
Having little motivation to make one’s life better
Focusing intensely on one’s emotional or physical pain
A desire to escape or disappear

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Developing an eating disorder
Self-mutilation, such as cutting
Thoughts of suicide
Suicide attempts
Overmedicating with drugs or alcohol
Being trapped in a lifestyle where one is devalued (in the sex industry, with an abusive partner, etc.)

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
Overachieving (setting high goals but taking no pleasure in meeting them)
Pushing oneself past reasonable limits as a form of punishment
Avoiding people and relationships
Hoarding behaviors

MAY ESCALATE TO:Depressed,Despair

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Worthlessness,Insecurity,Conflicted,Hopefulness

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Abuse, belittle, blame, bully
curse, degrade, despise, discredit
hate, humiliate, mock, punish
ridicule, sabotage, scoff, shame
taunt

WRITER’S TIP:Regret is a difficult emotion, one that is felt both in the moment and in the long-term. What old regrets have power over your character, steering their actions and decisions? Think about how these can become part of the story so your character can learn to let go of them.