SENSIBLE
DEFINITION:characterized by sound judgment and keen awareness

CATEGORIES:achievement, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:levelheaded, practical, pragmatic, realistic, reasonable

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Intelligence
Being highly logical
Having parents who encouraged one to think deeply
Being a caregiver or having responsibility for others
Being highly rational

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Investigating one’s options before reaching a decision
Weighing the pros and cons
Having realistic expectations of an outcome
Having good control over one’s emotions (especially high or rash emotion)
Being rooted in the present; living based on what one sees and knows to be real
Understanding what is needed and expected, then acting accordingly
Pausing to consider; thinking before acting
Reasoning well with others
Having strong common sense
Assessing the odds and risk before committing
Dressing and acting appropriately for the situation
Being well-spoken
Offering practical insight and advice
Objectivity
Not asking or expecting more than is reasonable
Adhering to commonly held beliefs and ideas
Being respected by others
Keeping one’s opinion to oneself when it’s prudent to do so
Respecting the experience and wisdom of others
Speaking in a calm, soothing tone
Being the voice of reason when emotions are volatile
Protecting others from themselves (stopping friends from acting impulsively, etc.)
Swaying others through practicality and common sense
Not taking risks
Seeking out wisdom or advice
Reusing or recycling an item for practicality
Entering relationships cautiously
Admiring others who are practical
Refusing to be coerced into risky behaviors
Multitasking
Being a good decision maker (even under pressure)
Having realistic hopes and expectations
Maintaining good health
Not overindulging (drinking too much, eating too much, etc.)
Expressing impatience or frustration with dreamers and idealists
Being responsible and trustworthy
Anticipating change and adapting in order to avoid unwelcome surprises
Appreciating order and rules
Having strong leadership and organizational skills

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
The clerk probably won’t give me a refund without a receipt, but it never hurts to try.
Diane is excited about this investment opportunity, but I’d rather go with something less risky.
I doubt Edgar will win the election, but we need options. It’s a step in the right direction.
I’m not sure what the dress code is, but business casual is usually a safe choice.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, determination, gratitude, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:A sensible character is an anchor, a life raft. When a situation turns tense or emotional, these characters are often the voice of reason and can bring things back under control. They are responsible, prepared, and can provide solid counsel for someone whose judgment is cloudy or uncertain. They can quickly assess problems and lay out options in a matter-of-fact way that avoids messy emotional ties.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Sensible characters are often content to settle rather than strive for improvement. Because they like to assess the odds of success and stick with what makes sense, they’re not likely to chase a big dream or pursue risky goals. Their disdain for spontaneity may cause others to view them as boring.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Ellis “Red” Redding inThe Shawshank Redemptionis a con who smuggles contraband within the prison, providing a practical service that keeps him safe from the other inmates. He befriends wrongfully convicted Andy Dufresne and offers counsel on how to survive the brutal environment. Alert to any change in mood within the prison, Red knows which wheels to grease and when it’s best to get out of the way.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Laura Ingalls (The Little House on the Prairieseries), Dr. McCoy (Star Trekseries), Sam Baldwin (Sleepless in Seattle)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:compulsive, immature, indecisive, flaky, foolish, melodramatic, playful, superstitious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SENSIBLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having to work with or be around foolish people
PLOTLINE: Being exposed to something one doesn’t believe in (paranormal activity, first contact, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Being forced to act on faith instead of logic
PLOTLINE: Being compelled to pursue an impossible dream or go in a direction that doesn’t make sense
