SENSUAL
DEFINITION:appreciating the senses; seeking to explore one’s appetites to gain sensory gratification

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:carnal, epicurean

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a deep love for all things and experiences
Being highly exploratory
Having a creative or artistic nature
Having a heightened awareness of and sensitivity to one’s senses
Having a strong libido

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Being highly curious
Having a deep appreciation for music, art, and beauty
Being highly tactile
Having a romantic nature
Wanting to share emotional or sensory experiences with others
Being sensitive to one’s emotions and the emotions of others
Taking one’s time while eating or drinking to fully enjoy the experience
Being hyper aware of warmth and light
Planning ahead to create the right mood (lighting candles, choosing music, etc.)
Enjoying color and its effect on one’s emotional state (seeing them as more vivid, etc.)
Appreciating the play of light (how it creates shadows, softens colors, etc.)
Breathing evenly and slowly
Texture sensitivity (e.g. awareness of a fabric’s softness and how it feels against skin)
Wanting to taste new foods
Enjoying textures on the tongue
Feeling physical changes associated with arousal (tingling nerves, rising body heat, etc.)
Feeling intoxicated by a pleasing scent
Boldness
Being sensitive to smells
Living for the moment
Being uninhibited
Seeking out physical gratification
Sexual teasing and bantering
Giving and receiving massages
Being attracted to another in a way that feels intoxicating
Engaging in sex
Experiencing a release in bodily tension when one’s sensual desires are met
Giving oneself over to sensations; becoming less aware of everything else
Having a vivid imagination; fantasizing
Desiring to discover and explore
Intensely desiring pleasure or ecstasy
Appreciating the aesthetics of nature
Having a passion for life and what it brings
Experiencing an emotional reaction to movies, books, art, or natural beauty
Dancing or swaying as a way of expressing one’s emotions
Wearing perfume or scented powders
Enjoying nudity
Publicly displaying affection
Sending suggestive notes, texts, or pictures
Being touchy-feely

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
The smell of those orchids is intoxicating.
Spending the day on the window chaise and warming myself in the sun is pure bliss.
Alan’s skin is so soft. I could spend hours tracing the slope of his back.
Every time I see the moonlight, I want to dance in it, be bathed in it.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, curiosity, desire, excitement, love, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Fearless and passionate, sensual characters are explorers. They seek gratification by delving into their senses and trying everything they can imagine. Highly attuned to emotion and desire, these characters love deeply and seek bliss in every moment, wasting no opportunities.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:In their quest for sensory stimulation and emotional gratification, these characters can sometimes take things too far. Poor judgment and an inability to make sound decisions in the heat of the moment may lead to irresponsibility, infidelity, and a greater risk of dependence on addictive substances.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:In9 ½ Weeks, Elizabeth McGraw, a recent divorcée, has an affair with a man she barely knows. Throughout their experience, they explore the senses together, not only through adventurous sexual play but through food, clothing, colors, sounds, and textures.Other Examples from TV:Charlie Harper (Two and a Half Men), Samantha Jones (Sex and the City)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:callous, inhibited, introverted, withdrawn

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SENSUAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living where sensuality is forbidden or inaccessible (a convent, prison, etc.)
PLOTLINE: A sensory processing disorder that causes hypersensitivity to a texture, smell, noise, etc.
PLOTLINE: Family or friends who disapprove of one’s choices and label one as a sexual deviant
PLOTLINE: Being caught in a vulnerable state (a nosy neighbor appearing during a skinny dip)
