SHAME
DEFINITION:The feeling that arises from a dishonorable or improper act; disgrace

NOTES:Not all shame is deserved; many victims of violence and abuse feel shame when they are, in fact, blameless. Even when a feeling of shame is unfounded, it will present the same way.

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
Cheeks that burn
Crumpling onto a chair or sofa
Pulling one’s arms and legs in toward the core
MutteringWhat have I done?orHow could I let this happen?
Using the hair to hide the face
Pulling a ball cap low
Pressing one’s hands against the cheeks
Dropping the chin to the chest
Eyes that are wet with tears
An inability to meet another’s gaze
Crumpling under scrutiny
Shaking, trembling, and shivering
Hunched shoulders
A perpetual slouch
A closed-off stance (crossing the arms, making oneself small, averting the head, etc.)
Pressing a palm over the lips to hold back a cry
Shaking the head
Letting out an uncontrolled moan
Punching one’s fists against one’s thighs to release frustration
Lashing out at others to transfer anger or blame
Arms hanging at the sides
Hitching breaths
A trembling chin
Shielding the body
Angling away from those bearing witness to the shame
Pulling and tugging at one’s clothes to make one less visible
Vandalism of one’s own things (self-punishment)
Loss of interest in one’s personal appearance
Seeking out second chances (fawning, begging, following others, etc.) to regain self-worth
Lying or doing whatever it takes to keep a shameful secret

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Hypersensitivity to noise, crowds, and activity
Flu-like symptoms (nausea, sweats, tingling in the chest, etc.)
Weak knees
Thickness in the throat
Heat and tingling in the face
Body tremors

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Flight reactions
Pulling away from friends and loved ones
Avoiding familiar places and activities
Self-loathing, berating oneself, anger, and disgust
Risk-taking behaviors; hoping something will happen to balance the scale
An utter lack of self-confidence
A desire to fade into the background and avoid notice
Believing that people are watching and judging (if the shameful event is a close-kept secret)

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Self-violence (scratching, cutting, pulling hair, etc.)
Depression
Substance abuse
Eating disorders
Increased sexual activity
Panic attacks
Anxiety disorders
Perfectionistic tendencies to balance the source of shame
Seeking power as a means of self-validation
Denial
Diverting blame to others
Suicide
Abusive relationships
Attempting to change one’s appearance
The belief that one deserves pain
Rejecting help out of a desire to do penance

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
Engaging with others, yet showing discomfort (avoiding eye contact, fidgeting, etc.)
Holding oneself rigidly tall and upright
Taking deep, steadying breaths
An overly bright smile
Being unreasonably aggressive or confrontational
Overcompensating

MAY ESCALATE TO:Depressed,Humiliation,Remorse,Self-Loathing

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Appalled,Defensiveness,Guilt

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Avert, clutch, cower, cringe
disguise, duck, flinch, hide
mask, quiver, retreat, self-harm
shake, shrink, sob, tremble
withdraw

WRITER’S TIP:There are dozens of physical, internal, and mental responses to use when conveying a given emotion. Filter possible cues through what you know about your character. “Would my character react this way?” is a great question to ask to stay on the right track.