SIMPLE
DEFINITION:not fancy; plain

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:down-to-earth, low maintenance, plain, unassuming

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of self
Being able to take things at face value
Growing up in a tight-knit community or family
Being easily overwhelmed
Being aware of and grateful for what one has
Having an understanding nature

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Transparency in relationships
Not judging others
Being content with what one has
Not needing to be fussed over
Honesty
Practicality
Wisdom that comes from observation and listening
Being comfortable in one’s own skin
Having no need for pomp or pretense
Seeing beauty in things that others miss
Being comfortable with silences in conversation
Not over-complicating things; keeping it simple
Feeling a sense of accomplishment through hard work
Being grounded in reality
Not needing accolades or recognition
Choosing comfort over style
Being adaptable; taking change as it comes
Optimism
Being strongly tied to one’s family and friends
Not caring about having the best or the newest things
Being unafraid of hard work or doing one’s share
Avoiding the limelight
Maintaining a “natural” appearance (not wearing makeup, etc.)
Being easy to talk to and be with
Humility
Generosity
Being a strong observer
Patience
Taking one’s time
Not placing high expectations on others
Enjoying the simple things
Not being interested in fashion trends
Being content to go along with others instead of leading
Having a quiet nature
Not being demanding
Being authentic; knowing who one is
Not needing material things to be happy

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Everyone will probably be dressed up, but I’m more comfortable in jeans.
I like baking with Mama, even though she hums more than she speaks.
I can’t wait for our date! I hope we go star gazing like last time.
Mara deserves all the attention on her birthday, so I’ll wait to mention my promotion.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:gratitude, happiness, hopefulness, peacefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:The adagewhat you see is what you getapplies aptly to simple characters. Open and honest, they have worthy priorities and a broad-minded perspective. They’re adept at balancing their emotions, are good listeners and friends, and are generally content with what they have.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Simple characters are often happy to stay in the background, increasing the likelihood of their being overlooked. If they have something to say, it’s usually important or insightful, although others may not listen or trust their wisdom because of their unassuming natures. Their desire to keep things simple means they’re often reluctant to get involved in initiatives or try new experiences, which robs them of opportunities that could lead to greater satisfaction and happiness.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Melanie Wilkes (Gone with the Wind) is a frail young woman who is more interested in discussing books than in gossiping. Her clothes—even at her engagement party—are described as plain and she doesn’t complain when war creates shortages of food, clothing, and other necessities. A supporting character in the story, Melanie’s simplicity and quiet demeanor provide a sharp contrast to the main character’s extravagance, frivolity, and melodrama.Other Examples from Literature:Marcus Brewer (About a Boy), Elizabeth Bennet (Pride and Prejudice)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:extravagant, flamboyant, frivolous, haughty, judgmental, melodramatic, perfectionist, proper, worrywart

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SIMPLE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Taking a job in a high-maintenance industry (being an accountant at a fashion magazine, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Constantly being drawn into unwelcome turmoil by melodramatic friends
PLOTLINE: Having to leave one’s home for safety reasons (a natural disaster, for example)
PLOTLINE: Being misjudged as weak due to one’s desire for simplicity and peace
PLOTLINE: Being forced to move from the town where one grew up and is comfortable
