SOPHISTICATED
DEFINITION:having worldly knowledge and wisdom

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:cultivated, debonair, polished, refined, urbane, worldly

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having parents who were world travelers
Being exposed to different cultures growing up (educational travel, etc.)
Attending a finishing school
Having a family pedigree that demands sophistication (royalty, upper class, etc.)
A desire to learn and experience
Growing up with power or wealth that offered exposure to high society

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Dressing appropriately and neatly
Having knowledge of world issues and being able to converse about them
Being self-assured
Carrying oneself with confidence; having good posture
Elegance
Being conscious of what’s fashionable and current
Speaking more than one language
Being educated in regards to quality (knowing good wine from bad, etc.)
Having good manners (opening doors for others, standing so someone else can sit, etc.)
Being socially adept
Having a strong sense of personal style
Engaging in conversation
Showing an interest in the arts (music, paintings, etc.)
Being highly social
Being well-read
Speaking in a controlled tone of voice
Having a knowledge of relevant historical events
Having worldly experience; being exposed to other cultures and ideas
Understanding the rules of popular sports or activities
Being apt at small talk
Seeking ways to increase one’s knowledge and personal growth
Being polished (being graceful, tucking in the edges of one’s skirt when sitting, etc.)
Independence
Eating and enjoying food from different cultures
Having a working knowledge of current politics and players
Smiling
Avoiding gossip or snarky judgments
Being well-groomed and neat
Exhibiting control in public (not eating or drinking too much, etc.)
Being willing to try new things
Wanting to learn
Having a good command of vocabulary
Sipping a drink instead of chugging it
Participating in events for enrichment (attending the opera or ballet, etc.)
Being socially aware (raising awareness of injustices, supporting a charity, etc.)
Networking with others to obtain information or help

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Alex didn’t help his wife out of the car? She’s six months pregnant!
I can’t wait to see The King and I with Lucy.
I wonder if Emma and I have read any of the same Italian books?
Prague is so beautiful this time of year. I wish I could be there.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, curiosity, gratitude, happiness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Sophisticated characters have knowledge of different cultures and ways of living. They often adopt some of the aspects of these foreign cultures, which gives them a unique flair. Their exposure to different people groups can make them tolerant and open-minded.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Sophisticated characters are not all snobby socialites drinking wine while snarking over society gossip and dropping names; yet, some are, and they can give a bad name to others. Members of this more superficial subset wear the right designer brands and go to all the important events. Wielding their power and wealth like a club to remind others of their status, these characters are often feared or disliked by their peers.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:The lead character in the filmSabrinagrows up as the shy, uncertain daughter of the chauffeur to a wealthy family. Although she has lived all her life on the Larrabee property, watching the Larrabee boys from afar, she remains unnoticed until she makes a trip abroad to Paris. She returns as a stylish, self-assured, worldly young woman who suddenly attracts the notice of both David and Linus and finds herself in the position of having to choose between them.Other Examples from Pop Culture:Audrey Hepburn, Princess Diana, Grace Kelly

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:abrasive, close-minded, rowdy, sleazy, timid, traditional, uncouth, violent

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SOPHISTICATED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with people of power and influence who are crass and disrespectful
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s wealth or influence due to a family member’s mismanagement
PLOTLINE: An experience that changes one for the worse (haughtiness after traveling the world, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Receiving criticism from loved ones when one changes as a result of one’s experiences
