SPIRITUAL
DEFINITION:focusing on one’s higher self; being interested in religious or sacred matters

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:pious, religious, reverent

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a religious environment
A near-death experience that shines a spotlight on one’s mortality
Being grateful for the blessings in one’s life
Having a pivotal religious experience
Embracing the humble belief that there are things greater than oneself

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Crediting God, the universe, or another source for one’s accomplishments
Praying or seeking spiritual counsel before making important decisions
Feeling one with nature and having a respect for all life
Believing that all living creatures have a soul
Studying passages from holy books (the Quran, the Bible, Śhruti, etc.)
Aligning one’s moral code with a spiritual belief system and acting accordingly
Attending services at a church, synagogue, shrine, etc.
Feeling connected to those who share similar beliefs
Proselytizing
Praying or meditating
Believing in miracles and signs
Seeking knowledge about the world, life, and things that cannot be seen
Accepting ideas or beliefs that have been passed down from others
Having a deep faith, even when doing so goes against common sense
Seeking to learn from those more knowledgeable in spiritual matters
Participating in sacred rituals
Wearing specific garments associated with one’s religion
Doing charity work
Searching for spiritual enlightenment via fasting, dream quests, a walkabout, etc.
Raising one’s children according to one’s spiritual beliefs
Abstaining from certain things (sex, alcohol, meat, etc.) as part of one’s beliefs
Experiencing guilt when one falls short of the spiritual ideal
Believing in an afterlife
Trusting in something that is greater than oneself
Thinking deeply about spiritual matters
Being open-minded to things that are impossible to explain
Striving to improve oneself
Sacrificially giving of one’s money, time, and resources
Devoting oneself to serving others rather than serving oneself
Working towards a spiritual end goal (enlightenment, entering the afterlife, etc.)
Depending on religion or an aspect of religion to save one’s soul
Communing with nature
Reacting to tragedy in a grace-filled manner
Seeking self-actualization
Forgiving others

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
What is the right thing to do in this situation?
How can I serve others?
In the grand scheme of things, I’m so insignificant.
Is this right for me? Am I on the right path? If only there was a sign.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:adoration, anticipation, contempt, desire, determination, fear, gratitude, guilt, happiness, love, peacefulness, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Spiritual characters are loyal, and often hold themselves to a high moral standard. In the face of criticism and doubt, they remain true to their beliefs. Their outward focus gives them a different perspective on tragedy and setbacks, allowing them to learn from negative experiences and grow in character.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Highly spiritual characters can become so focused on their religion that they lose touch with real life and become marginalized in modern culture. Their dedication to upholding what they believe to be right can also make them critical and inclined to disapprove of others when they fall short of the spiritual character’s standard. People who are not spiritual may struggle to understand those who are, believing them to be gullible or weak.

EXAMPLE FROM HISTORY:Mother Teresa of Calcutta selflessly devoted her life and all of her resources to God and the sharing of his love to the poorest of the poor. Profoundly prayerful and with an enormous capacity to love, she served those in poverty for 69 years, with little concern for her own needs. So great was her focus on others that when she was granted the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979, she received it “for the glory of God and in the name of the poor.”Other Examples from Literature, Film, and TV:the Jedi (Star Warsseries), the native Aborigines inQuigley Down Under, Kwai Chang Caine (Kung Fu)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, cruel, evil, intolerant, selfish, self-destructive, unethical, violent

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SPIRITUAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being in a situation where one’s spiritual beliefs clash with social norms
PLOTLINE: Needing to defy one’s spiritual beliefs in order to achieve one’s goal
PLOTLINE: Having another strong trait (greed, laziness, etc.) that makes following one’s beliefs difficult
PLOTLINE: Experiencing conflict when a family member or close friend opposes one’s spirituality
PLOTLINE: Having a family member leave one faith for another
