SPONTANEOUS
DEFINITION:enjoying what naturally occurs; given to acting on healthy impulses

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in a strict environment and wishing to be free of such structure
Growing up in a spontaneous and impulsive family
Being free-spirited
Having a short attention span
Wanting to live for the moment without considering the consequences
Being a naturally adventurous person who likes the adrenaline rush
Being extroverted; changing one’s plans when an opportunity arises to hang out with others

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Embracing change
Making do with what one has
Dropping in at a friend’s house instead of calling ahead
Seeing opportunities for fun in every situation
Living by a very loose schedule or not having one at all
Being content; not stressing when the situation is less than ideal
Not understanding when others can’t proceed without a plan or preparation
Disorganization
Not planning ahead
Taking impromptu trips and vacations
Deliberately altering one’s routine in an effort to keep things fresh
Making plans but changing them when a better option presents itself
Tasting new foods and trying new experiences
Being a risk-taker
Not thinking things through to their logical conclusion
Living in the moment without worrying about the future
Encouraging others to make the most of life
Being unconcerned with details
Unpredictability
Frequently changing one’s mind
Being highly unique; expressing one’s individuality
Creativity
Choosing an untraditional job that allows for spontaneity (acting, writing, art, etc.)
Having an easygoing, go-with-the-flow attitude
Letting other people make decisions
Being excited at the prospect of adventure and new experiences
Working toward short-term goals rather than long-term ones
Being enthusiastic
Being open-minded
Feeling stifled when life becomes too predictable
Experimenting with different hobbies, activities, and pastimes
Being silly
Staying calm and even-keeled when things don’t go according to plan
Making impetuous decisions
Enjoying surprises
Not being ruled or overly affected by fear or worry

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I’ve never been down this road before. Let’s see where it goes.
Time to make dinner. I wonder what we’ve got in the pantry.
I’m so bored. I’ll just pop over to Tim and Julie’s and see what they’re doing.
For my next vacation, I want to just show up at the airport and pick a destination!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, anticipation, curiosity, elation, excitement, impatience, surprise

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Spontaneous characters take life as it happens. Many of them feel confined by structure and rules and seek to live life moment to moment, doing whatever suits their fancy. While most people are intimidated by change, spontaneous characters see it as an opportunity to stretch themselves and broaden their horizons. Free-spirited and untraditional, these characters do things that others wouldn’t do and jump quickly when swift action is required.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters don’t often think things through and end up taking action without considering all the risks. Their reluctance to plan can result in them showing up unprepared (if at all), which can make them a detriment when they’re expected to work as part of a group. Often enthusiastic about a new endeavor, their reliability and productivity may wane when their interest starts to drift. This tendency makes it difficult for others to trust them with important duties.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Phoebe Buffay (Friends) is a free spirit who flies by the seat of her pants. Uninhibited by other people’s rules, she often strays from the traditional path, such as running like a child instead of in a dignified fashion, crossing professional lines with her massage clients, and periodically acting as her alter ego, Regina Phalange. She doesn’t seem to have any long-term goals and is content to live life as it comes, taking the good with the bad and making the best of every situation.Other Examples from TV and Film:Michael Scott (The Office), Adele August (Anywhere But Here)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:ambitious, analytical, cautious, controlling, disciplined, industrious, inhibited, nervous, nosy, organized, proper, responsible, sensible

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SPONTANEOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Having to work a structured, predictable job with no freedom of self-expression
PLOTLINE: Lacking the time or money needed to enjoy spontaneous pursuits
PLOTLINE: Having conflicting goals (wanting to be spontaneous while also wanting to please others, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Pursuing a goal that requires strict discipline, organization, and planning
PLOTLINE: Living or working with someone who craves discipline and order
