SPUNKY
DEFINITION:an inclination toward liveliness and high energy

CATEGORIES:interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:animated, bubbly, energetic, lively, peppy, spirited

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being free-spirited
Having an excess of energy
Being fun-loving
Having encouraging or permissive parents

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Enthusiasm
Wanting to make people smile
Excitability
Curiosity
Having a cheerful outlook
Speaking quickly with lots of gesturing and touching
Enjoying surprises and making new discoveries
Waking up energized and looking forward to the day
Desiring to learn by experience
Seeing the magical in the everyday
Trying new things just for fun
Enjoying new challenges
Friendliness
Interrupting out of excitability rather than from intentional rudeness
Skipping or moving with a bouncing step
Positivity
Assertiveness
Enjoying music, crowds, and events
Not complaining
Letting go of things that are beyond one’s control
Committing random acts of kindness
Spontaneity
Making suggestions for fun activities:I know…let’s go to the circus!
Making silly faces and being goofy to raise people’s spirits
Being active; enjoying exercise
Not worrying about what others think
Not wasting opportunities
Being determined; never giving up
Encouraging others
Being happy
Speaking one’s mind
Making decisions that are driven by emotion
Wearing colorful clothing
Having a strong sense of identity
Unpredictability
Not being afraid to show one’s exuberance
Difficulty going slowly, taking one’s time, or just lazing around

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I love Emma’s red hair. I think I’ll color mine, too!
I’m going to freak everyone out and start dancing on the table.
They say only boys can try out, but who cares? I want to play rugby, too.
Everyone’s worrying too much about winning. This is supposed to be fun!

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, confidence, excitement, happiness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Spunky characters are bubbly and optimistic and know what makes them happy. They can bring up the mood in a room and can often be found encouraging people to try new things and chase their dreams. Leading by example, they help others to let go of their fears and be themselves.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Spunky characters are so energetic and unpredictable that it can be exhausting to be around them. They don’t always read situations well and may not know when to try and cheer someone up or when to step back and give them space. Others may believe them to be naïve or irresponsible because they live in the moment and don’t think too far ahead.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Camp counselors Gary and Becky in the filmAddams Family Valuesare spunky and enthusiastic, spreading good cheer and encouragement among all the campers at Camp Chippewa. Their can-do attitude and refusal to be put off by rudeness or antisocial behavior make them worthy adversaries for Wednesday and Pugsley, who are determined to break out and save their uncle Fester.Other Examples from TV:Becky Rosen (Supernatural), Kenneth Parcell (30 Rock)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:abrasive, confrontational, proper, pretentious, stingy, traditional

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE SPUNKY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working through a relationship break up
PLOTLINE: Being in a social situation where one must be composed or reserved
PLOTLINE: Working within a tight deadline
PLOTLINE: Having to follow rules that one does not agree with
PLOTLINE: Feeling torn between being oneself and making a loved one proud
