STUDIOUS
DEFINITION:diligent in the pursuit of learning

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:academic, bookish, learned, scholarly, well-read

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in an academic family
Having a great respect for truth and knowledge
The desire to escape an ignorant upbringing
The need to escape one’s limiting environment

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Frequenting the library
Being widely read
Reading the classics
Taking on a heavy workload of classes
Not acceptingI don’t knowfor an answer; consulting resources to educate oneself
Being knowledgeable about many different subjects
Having an extensive library
Feeling impatience and scorn for those who choose to remain uninformed
Engaging in debates and discussions with other scholarly types
Being open-minded
Using big words
Getting so caught up in studying that one forgets other matters
Neglecting one’s appearance
Showing partiality to one’s preferred academics (Aristotle, Newton, Hawking, etc.)
Enjoying homework and schoolwork
Happily sharing one’s knowledge with others
Becoming frustrated when answers don’t present themselves
Haughtiness
Doing more than the required coursework
Taking great pride in one’s academic achievements
Being philosophical about lofty ideas and issues
Being more comfortable with books than with people
Speaking over people’s heads
Having a serious manner
Taking advanced classes
Choosing one’s words carefully
Protecting one’s reputation as an academic
Verifying one’s information before sharing
Exhibiting perfectionist tendencies with one’s schoolwork
Expressing anger when one’s reputation is questioned
Preferring solitude and quiet

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I need more information before I can make an informed opinion.
Who can I talk to who knows about this subject?
What can I learn from this situation?
This blog post on ancient Egypt is interesting. I’ll share it with the History Club.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:confidence, curiosity, determination, impatience, satisfaction, scorn, smugness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Studious characters are valuable due to their vast knowledge and love of learning. If a problem arises and information is lacking, they know where to go to find answers. When it comes to seeking knowledge, they are hardworking, uncompromising, and driven. Studious characters know things that others don’t and are eager to share what they’ve learned; as such, they can be very helpful advisors to your hero.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Studious characters are dedicated to seeking truth and learning new things—so dedicated that other things, like relationships and important issues, can take a back seat. Their vast knowledge can make them proud and haughty, leading them to scorn those who don’t know as much as they do. Studious characters know a lot of things, but an education based solely on book knowledge rather than real world experience can make for an impractical person who is out of touch with reality and incapable of helping anyone.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:Lisa Simpson (The Simpsons) is something of a misfit in her family due to her studious nature and intellectual bent. She has a wide range of knowledge covering many important topics that reach far beyond her hometown of Springfield. As a member of MENSA, her intellectual capabilities sometimes make her a little self-righteous. But overall, she is kindhearted and seeks to help others with her knowledge.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Hermione Granger (Harry Potterseries), Brian Johnson (The Breakfast Club)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:foolish, frivolous, indecisive, irrational, lazy, paranoid, scatterbrained, superstitious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE STUDIOUS CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a situation where one’s sources become unreliable
PLOTLINE: Having a tight deadline that makes extensive research impossible
PLOTLINE: Working with distractions that make study difficult
PLOTLINE: Losing access to one’s resources; having to rely solely on one’s current knowledge
PLOTLINE: Desiring answers in areas that are not well documented or easily understood
