SYMPATHY
DEFINITION:A sensitivity to the circumstances of others that results in a desire to offer support

NOTES:Sympathy and empathy are close in nature but aren’t the same. Sympathy is felt more at a surface level, meaning a person can provide support without feeling personally invested. On the other hand, empathy is a deeper manifestation where a shared emotional experience makes the moment highly personal and meaningful. For ideas on the latter, please view the EMPATHY entry.

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
Kind words
A soothing tone of voice
Telling someone that it will be okay
Patting someone’s back
Swallowing before speaking
Moving closer; entering another’s personal space (if they are open to it)
Squeezing a hand and then letting go
Offering a deep sigh and thoughtful expression
A parting hug that lasts longer than normal
An understanding nod
Eyes narrowing, the eyebrows pulling down in concentration
Asking what the person needs and how one can help
Offering the bright side:At least now we know, orIt could have been worse.
Pulling someone against your shoulder (if the relationship is close)
Stroking or smoothing someone’s hair
Clumsy attempts to comfort (a weak smile, an awkward hug, etc.)
Fumbling for words
Patting a leg in comfort
Leaning in or scooting closer
Offering a listening ear
Sitting in silence together because one doesn’t know what to say
Phrasing questions in a positive way to make the other person feel better
Bringing up something that will comfort:Your son is coming this weekend, right?
Sitting with one’s knees touching the other person’s
Bringing a box of tissue or a cup of tea, unasked
Floundering hand movements
Handling distractions (answering the phone, etc.) so the other person won’t have to
Apologizing—not out of accountability but to voice the unfairness of the situation
Offering the advice of a relative or friend:As my uncle used to say…
Fussing over the person’s appearance while speaking in encouraging tones
Listening intently while ignoring discomforts (cold, rain, heat, etc.)
Listening with one’s arms crossed over the chest
Leaning in awkwardly with the hands in the pockets, asking if things are okay
Looking elsewhere while listening, so as not to make the other person unduly uncomfortable
Offering to take the other person somewhere—a walk, a car ride, to hang out—as a distraction
Running defense for the person (making excuses on their behalf, telling people that their concerns can wait since the person needs a few moments, etc.)
Agreeing, even if the person is being irrational

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Feeling emotionally drained
An overall weighted feeling
A slower heartbeat
An ache in the throat

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Wishing one could alleviate the emotional pain
Uncertainty about what to say
Putting diplomacy above honesty
Forcing oneself to listen without judgment
Worrying that this event could happen again, particularly to oneself or loved ones
Seeing the contrast and having a sudden appreciation for one’s good fortune
Offering up prayers on their behalf
A narrowed focus that allows one to solely concentrate on the other person
Relief that one is not experiencing the same challenges

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Obsessive thoughts on how to fix the situation
The mind turning often to the person
Employing clichés:This too will pass, Keep your chin up, etc.
Giving comfort through gifts or plying the person with food or attention
Devoting time, money, or energy into helping the person navigate this situation

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
A hand that lifts towards the person, then lowers
Speaking often of the person or situation
Saying nothing overtly but privately praying for the person
Smiling or sharing a look but not offering verbal support
Watching at a distance, hoping for change

MAY ESCALATE TO:Empathy,Sadness,Love,Gratitude,Worry

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Indifference,Denial

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Advise, cheer up, comfort, commiserate
counsel, dote, encourage, fuss
hug, listen, motivate, observe
pat, protect, smile, soothe
squeeze

WRITER’S TIP:Emotions usually don’t jump from mild to extreme in a short period of time. To gain the reader’s trust, lay the proper foundation and show how stressors can lead to a greater intensity.