TALENTED
DEFINITION:having a marked (often innate) ability, usually in a creative, athletic, or artistic field

CATEGORIES:achievement, identity

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:accomplished, adept, expert, gifted, proficient, skilled

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a natural aptitude in a given area
Being exposed to many different experiences and activities
Dedication and perseverance
A deep, passionate love of a sport, type of music, art form, etc.

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Gravitating towards activities that emphasize one’s skill
Pushing oneself to always improve
Perfectionism
Exhibiting a strong work ethic
Associating with people who can further one’s career or increase one’s advantage
Learning everything possible about one’s area of giftedness
Trying new tricks and techniques to increase one’s ability
Competitiveness
Being goal oriented
Not being satisfied with the status quo
Worrying about the motives of others:Do they like me for me or for what I have to offer?
Growing up too fast
Seeking out successful mentors and coaches
Comparing oneself to others
Worrying about one’s image
Idolizing and studying successful icons in one’s field of giftedness
Quickly outpacing other same-age athletes or artists
Having difficulty accepting a loss gracefully
Perseverance
Becoming cocky or haughty
Losing one’s love for the talent; feeling like practice or training is a job
Fearing failure because one’s family is invested in one’s success
Making one’s talent the highest priority in one’s life
Setting aside anything or anyone that would be a distraction from one’s talent
Becoming devastated by a loss or setback
Demanding to be treated like an accomplished talent
Taking pride in one’s skill
Experiencing burnout
Feeling defined by one’s talent and wanting something more

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
This is what I was made to do.
I want to be the best.
If I don’t make first chair, I don’t know what I’ll do.
No one can beat me at this.
Great, another recital. I wish Mom and Dad would let me quit piano lessons.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:anticipation, anxiety, confidence, disappointment, doubt, eagerness, elation, envy, insecurity, nervousness, pride, smugness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Talents make characters well-rounded; they add dimension. With so many skills to choose from, they provide innumerable opportunities for creating unique characters. Talents, along with their other attributes, can make our characters valuable in group and social settings by giving them something to offer, whether it be practical (cooking, sewing, carpentry) or entertaining (singing, painting, acting) in nature.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Talented characters can come across as smug, disdainful, and overconfident. They are often envied for their abilities and can easily become targets. Those with talents might wonder whether people are showing true interest in them for who they are or only because of their abilities. As such, it’s not uncommon for very talented people to be insecure, untrusting, and lonely.

EXAMPLE FROM POP CULTURE:Questions about his personal life aside, no one can contest Michael Jackson’s giftedness. His vocal abilities and natural stage presence at age five were nothing short of amazing. He was an accomplished songwriter, penning the lyrics to many of his #1 hits, and could dance in a way that few could or can to this day. Unfortunately, talented people are as flawed as everyone else, and his personal life was marred by legal difficulties, questionable medical procedures, and other strangeness. But even after his death, his undeniable talent remains.Other Examples from Pop Culture:Michael Jordan, Michael Phelps, Fred Astaire, Aretha Franklin, John Williams, Steven Spielberg

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:easygoing, gullible, jealous, lazy, prejudiced, vindictive

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE TALENTED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Meeting another talented person who has no work ethic
PLOTLINE: Discovering that one’s talent is an impediment to achieving one’s goal
PLOTLINE: Rejecting one’s talent to pursue a passion in an area where one is unskilled
PLOTLINE: Facing criticism from parents or caregivers who don’t appreciate one’s talent
PLOTLINE: Dealing with pushy parents trying to live out their unfulfilled dreams through one’s gift
