THRIFTY
DEFINITION:marked by sensible management and economy

CATEGORIES:achievement, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:economical, frugal

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having economical or penny-pinching parents
Growing up in an environment of need
A desire for efficiency
A fear of going without
Fearing what the future may hold
Feeling a responsibility to be a good steward of one’s resources and possessions

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Saving money rather than spending it
Making a budget and sticking to it
Showing disdain for waste and extravagance
Keeping a close eye on one’s accounts
Using coupons
Using only what one needs
Setting limits on one’s expenditures
Shopping at thrift stores or buying on consignment
Making purchases when things go on sale
Participating in hobbies and activities that are inexpensive
Avoiding any kind of waste
Eating all the food on one’s plate at mealtimes
Saving up for large purchases rather than buying right away
Fixing broken items in an effort to get more use out of them
Living within one’s means
Repurposing old items (turning a bald tire into a swing, etc.)
Wearing hand-me-downs
Adopting items that others are throwing away
Making sacrifices in one area to be able to afford things in another area
Being economical with one’s resources (water, electricity, air conditioning, etc.)
Buying used items (cars, textbooks, clothing, furniture, etc.)
Being jealous of those who don’t have to worry about money
Fixing things oneself instead of hiring someone else to do it
Selling outgrown items instead of throwing them out or giving them away
Holding onto old items in case they can be used later
Taking pride in the amount of money one is able to save
Obsessive bookkeeping (balancing checkbooks, keeping all receipts, etc.)
Making thriftiness a game (tightening one’s budget to challenge, clipping coupons, etc.)
Teaching one’s children to be responsible and to take care of their things
Becoming upset when something is broken out of carelessness and must be replaced
Expressing a lack of tolerance for those who live above their means
Paying down one’s mortgage as quickly as possible
Asking for cash for one’s birthday so it can be used to pay the bills
Being reluctant to borrow money
Looking for small ways to bring in money (doing odd jobs, babysitting, etc.)

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Have I budgeted for this?
I wonder when the vacuum cleaners will be going on sale.
I hate to throw out Jack’s old tools. Maybe there’s some way I can salvage them.
No wonder they’re in debt; look at the money they waste!
I’m low on gas. Maybe I’ll walk to the store.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:agitation, contempt, determination, jealousy, pride, satisfaction, scorn, worry

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Thrifty characters aren’t wasteful; they make the most of what they have. Their financial practicality may cause them to be economical in other areas, too—with their time and materials, for example. While others get into trouble because they’ve been irresponsible with their resources, thrifty characters usually don’t have to go without and they may be in a position to help others or further themselves. Their penchant for saving rather than spending makes it easier to buckle down during difficult times.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Because thrifty characters are so used to saving, they often have trouble spending; this tendency can turn them miserly or stingy. Other people may view them as tightfisted because of their self-discipline and grow frustrated when they refuse to reciprocate in traditional gift-giving situations (birthdays, Christmas, etc.). On the other hand, thrifty characters may look down on others as being wasteful or extravagant. They may view money, resources, or results as being more important than people, which can make it difficult for them to relate properly to others.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Having lived with her brother for most of her adult life, Marilla Cuthbert (Anne of Green Gables) finds it hard to change her thrifty ways when Anne comes along. Anne’s dresses are made from serviceable materials bought on sale, and they don’t contain a frill, tuck, or puff that isn’t absolutely necessary. Marilla’s hair is always pulled into a tidy knot with two pins stuck through it, as if to do anything more or different would be a waste of time and energy. Poor Anne has a hard time at first, being far from economical, but over time, the two rub off on each other, and Marilla’s thriftiness is made less severe.Other Examples from Film and TV:Thomas Fairchild (Sabrina), Olivia Walton (The Waltons)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:extravagant, foolish, generous, immature, irresponsible, rowdy

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE THRIFTY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being paired with an extravagant or flamboyant character
PLOTLINE: Living in a culture where thriftiness is frowned upon rather than a trait to be emulated
PLOTLINE: Facing a situation where one must masquerade as someone of wealth and extravagance
PLOTLINE: Working in a job where there is constant waste (a hotel kitchen, restaurant, etc.)
