TOLERANT
DEFINITION:accepting of the beliefs, ideas, and behavior of others, even when they oppose one’s own

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:accepting, broad-minded, liberal, open-minded, permissive

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Living in a multicultural society
Having parents who encouraged open-mindedness
Being exposed as a child to many different ideas and beliefs
Having a respect for people, freedoms, and human rights
Understanding that what makes us different also makes us unique and interesting
Being highly patient

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Patience
Being able to compromise
Working well with others
Being willing to explain or teach others
Respecting the views of others
Forgiveness
Understanding how one’s past will affect one’s beliefs and behavior
Being non-judgmental
Avoiding intolerant people
Reflecting on what others have said; seeing things from their perspective
Being objective
Not seeking to sway or change someone else’s mind
Being considerate of others
Friendliness
Agreeing to disagree
Accepting others for who they are
Respecting the right for all religions to exist and for people to pick their own paths
Focusing on the positives in relationships and situations
Thinking before reacting
Refusing to hold a grudge
Controlling one’s emotions
Being diplomatic
Not needing to be in control of everything
Putting oneself in another’s shoes
Altering one’s ideas as one gains insight
Recognizing that opinions conflicting with one’s own are still valid
Not becoming defensive or taking things personally
Attempting to find common ground with others
Traveling outside of one’s culture and country
Being willing to listen and learn
Being at ease with oneself
Going with the flow
Being a good communicator
Having an inherent sense of fairness

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
I wish kids wouldn’t carve their names into trees, but I guess that’s how they express themselves.
Lorna’s new boyfriend isn’t my type, but if he makes her happy, that’s all that matters.
I wish my sister would discipline her kids, but they’re hers to raise, not mine.
Alan speaks Swahili and English at home. His kids will benefit from knowing two languages.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:happiness, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Tolerant characters are broad-minded, believing that everyone can and should make their own choices and decisions. Rather than push their agendas on others, these characters are willing to listen to alternate ideas and beliefs. In the face of disagreement, they can appreciate the fact that everyone has a right to their own viewpoints. Tolerant characters are good mediators and can be objective in situations where passions get in the way. They understand that compromise and patience are often the tools needed to move forward.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters can appear to be passionless if, in their fervor to make sure others are heard, their own voices are lost. This may cause them to miss out on opportunities to be seen as unique individuals and encourage others to assume they are too passive. Others may also take advantage of the patience and understanding of a tolerant character and run right over them in an effort to seize control or do as they want.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:When Charles S. Howard (Seabiscuit) decides to get into the horse racing game, he finds himself needing a knowledgeable staff to aid him. The experts he chooses—and the horse, as well—would have been dismissed by others as unqualified, irrelevant, and incorrigible. But he is able to see past their flaws to their potential. Even when they let him down, he shows them mercy, reminding them that you shouldn’t throw away a life just because it’s a little messed up.Other Examples from Film:Herman Moore (Remember the Titans), Alex Goran (Up in the Air)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, cruel, egotistical, entitled, just, intolerant, manipulative

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE TOLERANT CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Living within a policed state where one’s freedoms are limited
PLOTLINE: Teaching a class where the students see tolerance as a weakness to exploit
PLOTLINE: Encountering someone whose beliefs or actions one cannot tolerate
PLOTLINE: Dealing with people who cite tolerance to further their agenda of doing whatever they want
