TRADITIONAL
DEFINITION:acting and thinking in accordance with established beliefs and practices

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:conservative, conventional, orthodox

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being brought up with a respect for one’s heritage and past
Identifying strongly with one’s ancestors
Taking pride in one’s family history
Belonging to an “old family” with deeply embedded traditions
Having a romanticized view or interest in the past and old traditions

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Placing old beliefs and practices above innovation and new ideas
Holding to simplistic beliefs and values that do not change
Dressing and acting in ways that adhere to an established code
Finding comfort in patterns, routines, and old customs
Doing something a certain way because that’s how it’s always been done
Being happy with the status quo; not seeking changes
Passing on ideas to one’s children (marriage or gender roles, superstitions, etc.)
Clinging to a long-standing family career (raising cattle on a family ranch, etc.)
Participating in old-fashioned customary events (coming of age dances, etc.)
Celebrating ceremonies and holidays that remain unchanged throughout the years
Having strong ties to one’s family, community, and culture
Mistrusting outsiders or people with different ideas and beliefs
Respecting the wisdom of one’s elders
Openly disapproving of modern ways and technology
Being community-minded or family-focused
Wearing special clothing to denote a position of respect (priest robes, etc.)
Understanding and using the language of one’s ancestors
Aligning oneself politically and religiously with the family’s beliefs
Creating art or music in a traditional style (using tribal drums, sculpting wood, etc.)
Participating in long-standing rituals (baptisms, pilgrimages, parades, etc.)
Adapting to change only when forced to do so
Rarely questioning old beliefs or traditions
Inheriting responsibilities due to family ties
Retelling folklore and old stories from one’s past
Living in a family home or on property that has been passed down for generations
Using the same recipes and healing remedies as one’s ancestors
Using greetings and responses that have been in place for generations
Offering a customary gift (giving silver for a 25th wedding anniversary, etc.)
Singing customary songs to promote unity (national anthems, hymns, etc.)
Feeling a bond with others who share the same history, lineage, and customs
Marrying within one’s culture
Attaining a position of power because of age or lineage rather than competence
Choosing relationships with others who share the same views and values
Actively seeking to preserve old ways and institutions for future generations

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Fishing is the family business. Always has been, always will be.
I can’t believe Sarah didn’t wear black to the funeral.
A cut onion is the best cure for a bee sting. Everyone knows that.
Of course Alexa will go to Cambridge. Everyone in our family has gone there.
I hope Rena was kidding when she said she wasn’t planning on baptizing her baby.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:defensiveness, determination, gratitude, nostalgia, peacefulness

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Traditional characters are comfortable in their own skin. Soothed by the past, they survive tumultuous times by drawing on the strength of those who came before them. They respect their ancestors and their wisdom and carry on traditions and values, ensuring that future generations will be familiar with their roots. People know where they stand with traditional characters—as long as they respect their beliefs and don’t try to force change on them. These characters feel a great kinship with those who are like-minded and enjoy socializing with others who have the same customs and values.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters are not generally accepting of changes that depart from their traditions and structures. Unwilling to compromise if doing so goes against tradition, they can be difficult to talk to or reason with. They can sometimes harbor suspicion and bias toward those who differ in thought or behavior; as a result, they close themselves off from new ideas and innovation. This can limit their opportunities for personal growth, a better quality of life, and enlightenment.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:InBrave, Queen Elinor is so loyal to the customs of her people that she tries to force her daughter to marry someone allied with their clan. This leads her rebellious daughter to bargain with a witch for a spell that unintentionally turns Elinor into a wild black bear and puts the entire kingdom in jeopardy.Other Examples from TV and Film:Sherman Potter (M*A*S*H), Michael P. Keaton (Family Ties), Comte Paul de Reynaud (Chocolat), Tevye (Fiddler on the Roof)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:devious, free-spirited, imaginative, independent, lazy, quirky, rebellious, uninhibited

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE TRADITIONAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being forced to adapt as society changes (city expansion, people moving in, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a shift in government that brings about new laws and regulations
PLOTLINE: Discovering that a family member plans to break with tradition and do something unorthodox
PLOTLINE: Encountering openly judgmental people who scorn one’s beliefs and customs
PLOTLINE: Caring for a sick child whose condition is unimproved by traditional remedies
