TRUSTING
DEFINITION:relying or depending on others based on a belief in their strength and integrity

CATEGORIES:interactive, moral

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a sheltered yet loving upbringing
Being raised by parents who were supportive and reliable, yet protective
The belief that people are inherently good
Growing up in an environment where truth and honor were core values
Not having experienced crime, greed, or other negative influences

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Trusting the judgment of someone who has earned it
Committing to causes that one believes in
Making decisions based on positive past experiences
Asking few questions; needing no more information than what one has been given
Doing as one is told
Taking people at their word
Acting honorably and assuming that others will do the same
Asking innocent questions that reflect one’s limited insight into human nature
Nodding and smiling
Agreeing or committing without hesitation
Kindness
Feeling empathy for others
Being magnanimous when things don’t go as planned
Honesty
Believing in one’s ability to read people and their intentions
Having a cheerful demeanor
Believing that the motives of others are good
Helpfulness and thoughtfulness
Offering information freely if one believes that it will help
Giving someone the benefit of the doubt
Letting go of things that aren’t important to move forward or get along with others
Having few worries
Feeling connected to people
Altruism
Straightforwardness; not having hidden agendas
Being attuned to the emotions of others
Wanting to make the world a better place
Allowing others to make decisions
Rarely jumping to conclusions
Showing one’s respect of others and their privacy
Being trustworthy (keeping someone’s confidence, not engaging in gossip, etc.)
Being willing to try something new
Not being brought down by the occasional error in judgment
Pursuing strong relationships where one can safely be vulnerable
Idealism
Forgiveness
Not trying to manipulate others
Learning from one’s mistakes while maintaining a belief in the goodness of others

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Dee is good about returning books. Maybe she forgot about the one she borrowed.
I’m so grateful that Terry’s friend is handling the renovation. He’ll do a good job.
Dean’s a good driver, so I don’t mind loaning him my car for the weekend.
Too bad Eric’s working late again. Maybe we can get together next month instead.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:gratitude, happiness, peacefulness, relief

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Trusting characters are positive forces who believe that most people will prove themselves trustworthy. They open themselves up and act with honesty and integrity, expecting others to do the same. Trusting characters have strong, deep relationships that are built on mutual respect. Even if trust is broken, they can move on without it dampening their belief that people in general are good at heart and will do the right thing if given the chance.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters are transparent, even when they shouldn’t be. Some of the people they encounter will not have their best interests at heart, stealing their time, money, and ability to trust. In extreme cases, they may become jaded toward others and question the motivation and intentions of all people.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Simon Bishop (As Good as it Gets) is a friendly, kindhearted person who wants to believe the best of people. When his dog briefly disappears, he questions his neighbor and believes his claimed innocence, although it’s later revealed that the neighbor tossed his dog down the garbage chute. He also trusts his agent to hire a legitimate model for Simon’s latest art project. When the model turns out to be a homeless boy who robs and nearly beats Simon to death, he suffers a period of self-doubt and depression. But he doesn’t let it get him down for long. By the end of the story, Simon is back to his optimistic self, befriending his crusty neighbor and regaining the joy and inspiration he had briefly lost.Other Examples from Literature and Film:Cindy Lou Who (How the Grinch Stole Christmas), King Arthur (The Once and Future King), Forrest Gump (Forrest Gump), Buddy the Elf (Elf)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:calculating, cowardly, devious, disloyal, dishonest, jaded, manipulative, pessimistic, suspicious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE TRUSTING CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Entering into a relationship with someone who admits to cheating in the past
PLOTLINE: Experiencing fallout for trusting the wrong person
PLOTLINE: Trying to earn the trust of someone who is naturally suspicious
PLOTLINE: Being criticized by pessimistic people for being “too trusting”
