UNINHIBITED
DEFINITION:not restricted or restrained by societal or psychological norms

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:free, liberated, unrestrained

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Being content with oneself
Being free-spirited
A history of not fitting in
Self-confidence
Being hurt by society or authorities in the past and choosing to defy them in the present

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Flouting laws and rules
Going against the flow
Using a loud voice
Asking questions of those in authority
Wanting to know the reasoning behind rules or judgments
Not being a blind follower
Resisting peer or parental pressure (picking one’s own path, opting not to have kids, etc.)
Freely expressing one’s feelings in front of others
Laughing boisterously
Using big motions
Not being easily embarrassed
Walking with the head held high and a bounce in one’s step
Ignoring criticism and scorn
Wearing unconventional clothing and hairstyles
Not being overly concerned with what others think
Talking freely about subjects that some consider taboo (sex, drug use, religion, etc.)
Having a carefree, easygoing attitude
Associating with those who live on the edge of society
Changing one’s interests, one’s look, and one’s path to find the right fit
Participating in activities that one enjoys but may not be good at
Supporting others in loud, public ways (singing karaoke with a friend to afraid to go up alone)
Happily doing things alone if no one else will join in
Encouraging others to be free and unrestrained
Participating in activities that are frowned upon (skinny dipping, etc.)
Freely speaking one’s mind
Making fun of those who are uptight or reserved
Deliberately doing things to embarrass others
Avoiding toxic or needy relationships
Being willing to move, travel, and try new things
Intentionally pushing the boundary of what’s acceptable
Taking pride in one’s uniqueness
Confidence
Having artistic or creative hobbies
Being overtly sexual or flirtatious
Adventurousness and a willingness to explore everything

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Oh, it’s a stupid rule anyway.
People probably won’t approve, but I don’t care.
I don’t understand why people get so uncomfortable talking about sex.
Why isn’t anyone dancing? I’ll get things started.
I like Bill, and he’s attracted to me. I’m going to plant one on him to see if sparks fly.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, confidence, happiness, indifference, pride

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Uninhibited characters are unconcerned with social norms and the opinions of others; therefore they are free to be themselves. The strictures that keep others from expressing themselves in public have no hold on someone with an uninhibited nature. The self-confidence of these characters is appealing and admirable, especially to those who wish they could let go of their inhibitions.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Uninhibited characters can take their individuality so far that they don’t consider the feelings and sensitivities of others and can make them uncomfortable. Their disdain for the rules can cause trouble for them and their more responsible friends. Because they value individuality and freedom, these characters may express scorn for those who are more reserved, labeling them as uptight and in need of “loosening up”. Others may make snap judgments about an uninhibited person and assume wrong things about them.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:As a prostitute, it makes sense that Vivian Ward (Pretty Woman) is unconcerned with conforming to society’s norms, but it’s as much her personality as her profession that defines her as uninhibited. She sits on tables instead of chairs and eats pancakes with her fingers. At a polo match, she hoots and hollers and doesn’t mind that she’s the only one doing it. Walking down Rodeo Drive in her thigh boots and safety-pinned shirt, she’s completely at ease despite the looks she gets. While capable of getting her feelings hurt, she mostly ignores the haters and is content to be herself.Other Examples from Film and Pop Culture:Rod Tidwell (Jerry Maguire), Dennis Rodman, Marilyn Manson

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:fussy, haughty, humorless, inhibited, introverted, nervous, proper, sneaky, worrywart

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE UNINHIBITED CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Being thrust into an atmosphere of structure and predictability
PLOTLINE: Losing one’s freedoms
PLOTLINE: Suddenly becoming aware of and concerned with what others think
PLOTLINE: Experiencing drastic, unforeseen consequences for one’s uninhibited behavior
PLOTLINE: Forced responsibility (having to raise a sister’s kids when their mother dies, etc.)
