WHIMSICAL
DEFINITION:fancifully spontaneous; giving in to humorous or imaginative impulsiveness

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:fanciful, free-spirited, quaint

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Growing up in an artistic or creative environment
Having parents who encouraged exploration and expression over structure and rules
Being a free spirit
Being highly playful and fun-loving
Having a strong sense of curiosity

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Embracing a unique and often comical outlook
Feeling unrestrained by rules or society
Unpredictability
Happiness
Seeking out new and different experiences
Encouraging others to explore their sense of fun
Having a strong sense of humor
Spontaneity
Flamboyancy
Seeing beauty in things most others do not
Attempting to shake things up
Breaking minor rules or going against the norm for innocent fun
Giving over to laughter
Asking unusual questions:Are leprechauns related to gnomes, do you think?
Voicing funny thoughts to encourage laughter
Being strongly imaginative
Daydreaming about fantastical or impossible things
Showing cleverness
Being in tune with one’s moods and emotions
Having a fun and vibrant attitude
Silliness
Embracing creativity
Making random choices to see what will happen
Kidding around with friends
Enjoying make-believe and storytelling
Thinking in a nonlinear fashion
Embracing one’s inner child
Joining fantasy role-playing groups online or in real life
Enjoying surprises and unexpected results
Having an unusual perspective
A desire to dress up and role-play
Appreciating the unusual
Taking an interest in strange or obscure music and art
Expressing oneself in odd or unusual ways
Making faces to express one’s emotions
Impulsiveness
Not caring or worrying about what others think
Getting a crazy or unusual idea and running with it

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
That hill is huge! I should roll down it to see how dizzy I get.
So, what happens if a genie rubs a magic lamp? Does he get three wishes too?
Janie’s mom looks like a unicorn. You know, without the horn. Hey, I should tell her that!
I think I’ll wear only green from now on and see how long it takes people to notice.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, anticipation, curiosity, desire, happiness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Whimsical characters always make things interesting. Their offbeat and open-minded way of looking at life can inspire others to let go, laugh, and embrace their inner child. Having a strong sense of humor and enjoying both fantasy and fun, whimsical characters embrace imagination and can liven up stuffy, serious moments with good-natured levity.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:These characters’ lack of seriousness can make them appear irresponsible, landing them in trouble with others. While they are chasing fun, they might not be there for the people who need them, weakening those relationships. Some may grow frustrated at how fanciful and spontaneous these characters are when seriousness and consistency might be the better choice.

EXAMPLE FROM FILM:Fraulein Maria (The Sound of Music) is a grown woman and nun initiate, but she barely fits the mold. She repurposes ugly curtains into play clothes, dances on hilltops, and makes up songs while biking through Switzerland. It’s simply in her nature to be lighthearted and spontaneous, which serves her well, first as a governess and later as the mother of seven.Other Examples from Literature:Lucy Pevensie (The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe), Anne Shirley (Anne of Green Gables)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:analytical, cautious, controlling, disciplined, fussy, humorless

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE WHIMSICAL CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Experiencing a loss or defeat, especially when one has worked hard to achieve one’s goal
PLOTLINE: Living in a somber environment (a convent or a Catholic boarding school, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Having to make small talk with someone who is stuffy and serious
PLOTLINE: Being assigned a task that requires following guidelines and focused thinking
PLOTLINE: Wanting to be seen as a professional but struggling with the regimented nature of it
