WISE
DEFINITION:having deep understanding and sound judgment resulting from insight, time, or experience

CATEGORIES:achievement

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:knowledgeable, sage

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Intelligence
Having a deep understanding of a specific topic
Having experienced a plethora of situations and experiences
Being well-read and contemplative
Dedicating oneself to a life-long study of a topic, people, or environment (Jane Goodall, etc.)

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Watching and listening before speaking
Only speaking when one has something to add to the conversation
Seeing the world for how it really is
Being a good judge of character
Making time for meditation
Viewing mistakes as learning opportunities
Having an open heart; showing compassion for others
Abiding by one’s unwavering moral standards
Humility
Forming strong beliefs and opinions over the course of many years
Thinking deeply before committing to a path or action
Knowing oneself intimately
Empathizing with others
Pursuing self-growth
Wanting to learn
Embracing good habits that promote health and happiness
Making balanced decisions
Seeing the bigger picture
Sharing one’s knowledge with others
Constantly evaluating oneself
Patience with others, especially the young and inexperienced
Being teachable
Being widely read
Having a sense of humor
Showing kindness to others
Asking questions and seeking out answers
Taking advantage of opportunities to learn or experience new things
Respecting the world and the creatures in it
Open-mindedness
Maturity
Patience
Being able to set aside one’s emotions to be objective
Seeing past what’s outside (persona) to what is inside (the individual)
Understanding cause and effect
Desiring change and working toward bringing it about
Accepting oneself and one’s flawed nature

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
Jason’s mom shouldn’t worry. In time, he’ll find his direction.
All this trouble could be avoided if people just took a deep breath before acting.
Some call me master, but I am only a lifelong student.
If I tell Greg what to do, he’ll never learn to think for himself.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amazement, amusement, anguish, anticipation, curiosity, gratitude, happiness, hopefulness, peacefulness, satisfaction

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Wise characters have the benefit of age and experience. Open-minded and mature, they are life-long learners who look for opportunities to share what they know in a way that benefits others. Those with wisdom see the big picture and have great passion for the people around them and the world they live in. As such, people treat them with respect and reverence and often show appreciation for their unique, wide-angle view.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Wise characters are extremely patient and are not usually in a rush for things to happen. They may have the attitude that everything will work out as it is meant to, which can be frustrating or seem trite to others. However, sometimes acting quickly or proactively is necessary; opportunities to create change and lessen suffering may be missed if immediate action is sacrificed in favor of caution and reflection.

EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE:Gandalf (The Lord of the Ringstrilogy) has the benefit of age and experience, both of which have made him incredibly wise. As such, he offers guidance to the people of Middle Earth and is able to help them fight off the armies of Mordor. When he himself needs help, he does not hesitate to consult those who have greater knowledge, for Gandalf understands that the pursuit of wisdom is never-ending.Other Examples from Film and Literature:Ramírez (Highlander), Obi-Wan Kenobi (Star Warsseries), Albus Dumbledore (Harry Potterseries)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:controlling, cruel, gullible, impatient, paranoid, reckless, rude, self-destructive, suspicious

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE WISE CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Dealing with headstrong youth who have no respect for age, knowledge, or authority
PLOTLINE: Foreseeing something terrible in the future and being powerless to stop it from happening
PLOTLINE: Offering advice and counsel and being ignored
PLOTLINE: Discovering that one’s mentors have not always had the best intentions
PLOTLINE: Offering advice and having it used for harm instead of for good
