WITTY
DEFINITION:having intellectual capacity marked by clever humor

CATEGORIES:identity, interactive

SIMILAR ATTRIBUTES:droll

POSSIBLE CAUSES:
Having a strong sense of humor or dry observation that is combined with quick thought
Growing up in a home where intellectual or thoughtful humor was encouraged
A desire for acceptance or admiration
Insecurity
A desire for control; using one’s intellectual prowess to put others in their place
A nervous response to being in an uncomfortable situation

ASSOCIATED BEHAVIORS:
Making jokes based on high intellect
Avoiding and disdaining the “easy laugh” (potty humor, slapstick comedy, etc.)
Always having the last word
Quick thinking
Naturally seeing the humorous side of things
Reading into what people say; naturally spotting double meanings
Having keen perception of people, particularly noting their flaws and ironies
Translating one’s knowledge into comedic observations
Using one’s wit to chastise or reprimand others
Passive-aggressive behavior
Taking in what others say
Using comparisons to be humorous
Indulging in exaggeration
Quoting movies, books, and pop culture in a humorous way
Speaking in a carefree tone, as if wittiness comes naturally without a lot of work
Knowing one’s context; tailoring quips to one’s audience
Likability
Competitiveness; engaging in a battle of wits with other witty people
Being able to read one’s audience
Saying things that are unexpected
Thinking creatively
Confidence
Laughing often
Flirtatious behavior
Delivering jokes with a deadpan expression or minimal movements
Playing with words; showing an interest in vocabulary
Admiring other quick wits
Studying the masters
Making observations that are ironic and humorous that others never considered

ASSOCIATED THOUGHTS:
How can I say that in a funny way?
That went over well. I’ll use that again.
I love that Taylor can laugh at himself and doesn’t take things too seriously.

ASSOCIATED EMOTIONS:amusement, confidence, happiness, pride

POSITIVE ASPECTS:Witty characters make observations that can turn mundane situations or events into hilarity. These characters are often the first to make a joke and can elevate an existing quip by adding another layer of observation, carrying the humor farther. Quick-thinking, witty folks deliver one-liners which are both clever and eye-opening, allowing others to experience a situation’s meaning at a different level, often through the lens of irony. Because most people like to laugh, witty characters are often well-liked by others.

NEGATIVE ASPECTS:Characters with a quick wit can sometimes let their mouths get ahead of their good sense, offering humor when it isn’t wanted or needed or joking in a way that makes people uncomfortable. Some characters who are enthralled with their own wittiness can veer into caustic wit and sarcasm, which can hurt or humiliate others. There is also the chance that an observation about a group or belief could unknowingly touch on a sensitive subject and offend listeners. In addition, people can be turned off by a witty character’s constant one-upmanship.

EXAMPLE FROM TV:In the television showM*A*S*H*, Hawkeye Pierce has a comeback for everything. Intelligent, quick-witted, and a born smart aleck, he uses humor both as a means of making his unwilling presence at the Korean conflict bearable, and as a release for his cynicism and resentment. While his constant jokes grate on some members of the unit, many of his fellow soldiers and medical practitioners find it a welcome relief.Other Examples from Film and TV:Porthos (The Three Musketeers), Niles Crane (Frasier)

TRAITS IN SUPPORTING CHARACTERS THAT MAY CAUSE CONFLICT:devout, eccentric, humorless, insecure, introverted, proper, volatile

CHALLENGING SCENARIOS FOR THE WITTY CHARACTER:
PLOTLINE: Working in a serious environment where humor isn’t appreciated
PLOTLINE: Facing a foreign audience or culture that doesn’t get one’s humor
PLOTLINE: A debilitation that limits one’s ability to be witty (mental decline, fatigue, etc.)
PLOTLINE: Feeing burned out or blocked, and no longer achieving the big laughs
