WORTHLESSNESS
DEFINITION:Feeling devalued, unimportant, and insignificant

PHYSICAL SIGNALS AND BEHAVIORS:
An inward, pained look (eyes drawing closer, brow creased, slackness in the face, etc.)
Avoiding eye contact, looking down
Keeping one’s hands hidden (in pockets, jammed into armpits, etc.)
Hesitating when speaking; having difficulty getting words out
Mumbling or talking in a soft-spoken voice
Low energy
Taking up as little space as possible
Collapsed body posture (shoulders that curl forward, the arms hanging limply, etc.)
Being non-reactive (expressing little emotion)
Shielding one’s body (half-turning away, talking to the side rather than facing someone head on, crossing the arms or gripping the opposite elbow with a hand, etc.)
Moving slowly (shuffling, dragging one’s feet, etc.)
Self-soothing gestures (rubbing the arms, stroking a sleeve, etc.)
Showing surprise when someone engages and responding awkwardly, unsure of how to act
Craving connection yet avoiding social situations and events
Taking insults and bullying rather than challenge them
Flinching at criticisms and needing to escape
Withdrawing; wanting to be alone
Avoiding situations where comparisons are likely (feeling inferior)
Not expressing one’s opinions due to the belief that they’re invalid
Refusing to speak up or advocate for oneself
Underachieving or avoiding setting any goals
Refusing to ask for help due to the belief that one doesn’t deserve it
Not taking care of one’s health, hygiene, etc.
Frequently breaking down into tears
Watching oneself cry in the mirror to feel “seen”
Deflecting compliments by citing one’s faults or failings instead
Self-deprecation
Feeling alone, even with other people
Giving up easily (expecting failure)
Saying yes to whatever is asked, even if it is unfair or causes hardship

INTERNAL SENSATIONS:
Eyes that grow hot
Heavy, dull pain throughout the body
Experiencing physical pain in the chest or stomach when imagining the future
An almost constant ache in the throat
Difficulty pulling in deeper breaths (tightness in the chest)

MENTAL RESPONSES:
Mental fuzziness and detachment
Thoughts that circle failure, creating a self-fulfilling prophecy
Demoralizing self-talk:Just shut up. No one cares about your ideas anyway.
Consistently doubting one’s abilities
Feeling inadequate in every way; yearning to be someone else
Being prone to envy and jealousy
Viewing any mistake (big or small) as confirmation of one’s worthlessness
Feeling that others are judging one negatively (inferiority complex)
Becoming overwhelmed—even moved to tears—by beauty

ACUTE OR LONG-TERM RESPONSES FOR THIS EMOTION:
Constant fatigue
Poor performance at work or school
Seeking out anyone (even toxic people) who provide one with a sense of value
Cutting and other self-harming behaviors
Taking risks with one’s life and leaving the outcome up to chance
Engaging in bad habits (drugs, unprotected sex, etc.) to cope and not caring about the effects
Depression
Suicidal thoughts or attempts

SIGNS THAT THIS EMOTION IS BEING SUPPRESSED:
Forming and sustaining dysfunctional or toxic relationships
Lowering one’s standards and expectations
Pasting on a fake smile
Lying about one’s life, activities, success, etc. to pretend one is someone “better”
Making excuses for the mean or abusive people in one’s life
Pretending that one’s kindnesses toward others are due to altruism rather than one’s low self-worth

MAY ESCALATE TO:Shame,Depressed,Self-Loathing

MAY DE-ESCALATE TO:Stunned,Neglected,Hopefulness,Insecurity

ASSOCIATED POWER VERBS:
Avoid, belittle, blame, cope
cringe, cry, detach, dismiss
disregard, expose, flinch, hate
hide, hunch, hurt, loathe
neglect, recoil, reject, reveal
shield, shrug, slump, sob
stoop, stress, struggle, suffer
undercut, weaken, weep

WRITER’S TIP:If you aren’t happy with an emotional response, change the setting. If the character is alone, put them around people. If they are with others, isolate them or take away their comfort zone.